
===== PAGE 1 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY
AND ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENT
Revision Guide
ecscard.org.uk | For ECS Health, Safety and Environmental Assessments from 6 May 2024
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
HEALTH, SAFETY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
Revision Guide
For assessments from 6 May 2024
Introduction 3
General Health and Safety at Work 7
Manual Handling Operations 14
Reporting Accidents 19
Personal Protective Equipment at Work 25
Health and Hygiene 30
Fire and Emergency 35
Work at Height 44
Work Equipment 49
Special Site Hazards 53
Electrotechnical 56
Environmental 63
© Electrotechnical Certification Scheme
Administered in England, Wales and Northern Ireland by Administered in Scotland by the Scottish Joint Industry
the Joint Industry Board for the Electrotechnical Industry Board for the Electrical Contracting Industry
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
INTRODUCTION PREPARATION
This guide should be used to help prepare for the
The information in this guide is for ECS Health,
assessment. The guide contains all the questions that
Safety and Environmental Awareness Assessments
can be used to make up the awareness assessment,
taken from 6 May 2024.
together with the correct answer and, where applicable,
The electrotechnical industry is constantly striving to improve
a brief explanation of the answer. The assessment uses a
the Health and Safety awareness of everyone working in the
selection of the questions from the question bank printed
industry. The Electrotechnical Certification Scheme (ECS)
in this guide, however, the four answers in the assessment
Health, Safety and Environmental Awareness Assessment
may be in a different order from the order shown in this
was originally introduced in 2002 in compliance of the
guide. There are no questions in the assessment that are
Electrotechnical Certification Scheme’s affiliation to the
not in this guide. The assessment is designed to test basic
Construction Skills Certification Scheme (CSCS) that requires
knowledge and awareness of health and safety for people
anyone obtaining or renewing an ECS Card to demonstrate
working in the electrical industry and on construction sites.
an acceptable standard of health and safety knowledge.
The awareness assessment is not trying to trip up or catch
people out. all the questions in the assessment are listed
THE ASSESSMENT
in this guide. The ECS Health Safety and Environmental
Awareness Assessment may be used as the end of course
The ECS Health. Safety and Environmental Awareness
test for health and safety training but in no way should
Assessment is made up of 50 multiple choice questions
be considered a qualification in Health and Safety.
drawn randomly from the question bank to be completed
in 30 minutes. Each question will require one correct
answer to be picked from a choice of four.
ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND
The ECS HSE Awareness Assessment is available online
The assessment will be made up from questions covering
eleven topics. The numbers of questions that will be used through the MyECS and Employer Portal and this remote
invigilation system is the quickest and simplest way to do
from each topic are:
the assessment.
General Health and Safety at Work 6
For those who wish to attend a physical centre
Manual Handling Operations 4
for assessments, please see the ECS website at
Reporting Accidents 3
www.ecscard.org.uk/venues
Personal Protective Equipment at Work 4
SCOTLAND
Health and Hygiene 3
The SJIB offers paper-based assessments across the
Fire and Emergency 9
whole of Scotland. Please call 0131 445 9216 to book an
Work at Height 5
assessment or visit www.sjib.org.uk for more information.
Work Equipment 4
ONLINE ASSESSMENTS
Special Site Hazards 3
For remotely invigilated assessments taken at home or at
Electrotechnical 6
work, there is a guidance video on the ECS website which
Environmental
shows how to set up and take assessments. This can be
To successfully pass an assessment, 43 out of the 50 found at www.ecscard.org.uk/RIS
questions must be answered correctly.
System Requirements
If the delegate is unsuccessful they may take a new
• To be in a room on your own and not be disturbed
assessment. A fee is chargeable by the assessment
organisation for each assessment taken by the delegate. • Have a current photo ID with you
• Have a stable Internet connection and working web cam
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
IN CENTRE ASSESSMENTS
The delegate will need:
• Photographic identification such as an ECS card, current
passport or in date photo driving license
• National Insurance Number
• A valid personal email address (for the result to
be sent to if taking the computer-based version
of the assessment).
An invigilator will explain how to take the assessment,
will check the delegate’ s identity and take the delegate’s
photograph as a record of the person who took the
assessment.
For delegates that are not confident in using computer
equipment, a practice test is available before the main
assessment is taken. To take the practice assessment the
delegate must request it from the session invigilator prior
to taking the main assessment. There is no charge for the
practice assessment.
The invigilator will be on hand during the assessment
to provide administrative support but will not offer any
assistance with answering the assessment questions.
If a computer-based assessment is taken the delegate will
be informed of their result at the end of the assessment.
The delegate will also be able to review the answers to
the questions that were in their assessment.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
Listed below are the areas of knowledge that will be assessed. 5. Health and Hygiene
You should have a basic understanding of:
1. General Health & Safety
• The dangers of exposure to substances, such as asbestos
You should have a basic understanding of:
• The importance of good personal hygiene when working
• How the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974,
with hazardous substances
Regulations and Approved Codes of Practice affect you
• How to reduce the risks of diseases carried by vermin
• Employer’s responsibilities under the Health and Safety
• The welfare facilities required to be provided on
at Work Act
construction sites.
• Your responsibilities to yourself and to others under the
• How to reduce the risks from hand-arm vibration and
Health and Safety at Work Act
noise at work
• How health and safety law is enforced
6. Fire and Emergency
• The powers of Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
inspectors
You should have a basic understanding of:
• The key features of health and safety signs in
• What to do in the event of an emergency at work
the workplace
• The types of fire extinguishers available and the types
of fires they can each be used on
2. Manual Handling Operations
• The importance of first aid following an accident
You should have a basic understanding of:
• Basic knowledge of fire safety in buildings including fire
• What manual handling operations mean in the context
stopping and the role of the Building Safety Regulator
of an employee and what employers must do to protect
employees from injury
7. Work at Height
• The types of injury you could suffer from carrying out
You should have a basic understanding of:
manual handling tasks
• The importance of using the most suitable access
• The parts of your body most likely to be affected by
equipment for the task
manual handling injuries
• Only working from ladders or stepladders when the task
• How to decide whether a manual handling activity is safe
is of low risk and short duration
• What must be taken into account when making a manual
• Safety precautions to be taken when using scaffolds,
handling risk assessment
mobile elevated work platforms, safety harnesses etc.
• The principles of good manual handling techniques
8. Work Equipment
3. Reporting Accidents
You should have a basic understanding of:
You should have a basic understanding of:
• Only using work equipment you have been trained and
• The need to report injuries, accidents, certain
authorised to use
diseases and dangerous occurrences to the Health
• The importance of carrying out checks on equipment
and Safety Executive
before use
• Why you must report accidents to your employer
• Reporting any defects and not using defective equipment
• The need to record in the accident book all accidents
• The use of reduced low voltage systems to supply
that cause any injury whatsoever
hand-held electrical equipment on construction sites
• What reportable injuries, dangerous occurrences
• The safe use of extension cables
and reportable diseases are
9. Special Site Hazards
4. Personal Protective Equipment at Work
You should have a basic understanding of:
You should have a basic understanding of:
• The safety precautions to be taken before working
• When PPE should be worn
in a confined space
• Why your employer must provide you with PPE
• The precautions to be taken when carrying out
• Why you must use the PPE provided by the employer
excavation work to reduce the risks from contact
• Why you must take care of PPE supplied for your use
with underground services, falling materials etc.
• Why you must report lost or damaged PPE to your
• The precautions to be taken when working near
immediate superior
overhead power lines
• The possible effects of not wearing PPE
• The dangers to pedestrians from vehicles on site
• The limitations of PPE
• The additional risks to young people at work and those
working alone
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
10. Electrotechnical
You should have an understanding of:
• The effects of electric current on the body
• The types of socket outlets used on construction sites
• The need for persons working on electrical systems to
be competent to do so
• The use of residual current devices for additional
protection against electric shock
• Safe isolation procedures when working on electrical
systems and equipment
• Only working ‘live’ in exceptional circumstances
• Safe working with optical fibres
11. Environmental
You should have an understanding of:
• The responsibilities and requirements for
handling materials
• Actions for recycling and to minimise waste
• The identification of hazardous/special waste
• The precautions and procedures for handling
hazardous/special waste
• Sustainability in the selection and use of materials
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY AT WORK
QUESTION 1.1
What do the letters CDM stand for?
Right Answer: D
A. Control of Demolition and Management Regulations
The CDM Regulations impose duties to manage
B. Control of Dangerous Materials Regulations
construction projects, ensure physical safeguards
C. Construction (Demolition Management) Regulations
are provided to prevent danger during such projects
and that adequate welfare facilities are provided.
D. Construction (Design and Management) Regulations
QUESTION 1.2
Identify one method of enforcing regulations that are available to the Health and Safety Executive:
A. Health Notice Right Answer: B
Improvement notices require action to achieve
B. Improvement Notice
standards which meet health and safety law.
C Obstruction Notice
D. Increasing insurance premiums
QUESTION 1.3
What happens if a Prohibition Notice is issued by an Inspector of the local authority or the HSE?
Right Answer: C
The work in hand can be completed, but no new
A.
work started
The work activity covered by a prohibition notice
must cease, until the identified danger is removed.
The work can continue if adequate safety precautions
B.
are put in place
C. The work that is subject to the notice must cease
The work can continue, provided a risk assessment
D.
is carried out
QUESTION 1.4
Health and Safety Executive Inspector can?
A. Only visit if they have made an appointment Right Answer: B
Inspectors have a range of powers, including the
B. Visit at any time
right to visit premises at any time.
C. Only visit if accompanied by the principal contractor
D. Only visit to interview the site manager
QUESTION 1.5
Prohibition Notice means:
A. When you finish the work you must not start again Right Answer: B
The work activity covered by the prohibition notice
B. The work must stop immediately
must cease, until the identified danger is removed.
C. Work is to stop for that day only
D. Work may continue until the end of the day
QUESTION 1.6
In what circumstances can an HSE Improvement Notice be issued?
Right Answer: A
A. If there is a breach of legal requirements
Improvement notices require action to achieve
B. By warrant through the police
standards which meet health and safety law.
C. Only between Monday and Friday on site
D. Through the prosecution office
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 1.7
What is an Improvement Notice?
A notice issued by the site principal contractor to tidy Right Answer: D
A.
up the site
Improvement notices require action to achieve
standards which meet health and safety law.
A notice from the client to the principal contractor to
B.
speed up the work
A notice issued by a Building Control Officer to deepen
C.
foundations
A notice issued by an HSE/local authority Inspector to
D.
enforce compliance with health and safety legislation
QUESTION 1.8
If a Health and Safety Executive Inspector issues a Prohibition Notice, this means that:
The Site Manager can choose whether or not to ignore Right Answer: B
A.
the notice
Prohibition notices are intended to stop activities
which can cause serious injury.
Specific work activities, highlighted on the notice,
B.
must stop
C. The HSE must supervise the work covered by the notice
D. The HSE must supervise all work from then on
QUESTION 1.9
Employers are required to provide information to their employees on their health and safety rights and responsibilities
and how to get advice by:
Right Answer: B
A. Telling them verbally when they start work for them
This is a requirement of the Health and Safety
Displaying a poster or giving them leaflets approved by
B.
Information for Employees Regulations (as amended).
the HSE
C. Making them read the company health and safety policy
D. E-mailing the information to them
QUESTION 1.10
Who is responsible for signing a Company Safety Policy?
A. Site Manager Right Answer: D
The Health and Safety at Work Act requires the most
B. Company Safety Officer
senior member of management to sign the health and
C. Company Secretary
safety policy statement.
D. Managing Director
QUESTION 1.11
Which one of the following must be in a company’s written Health and Safety Policy?
Right Answer: B
A. Aims and objectives of the company
This is a specific requirement of the Health and Safety
Organisation and arrangements in force for carrying out
B.
at Work Act.
the health and safety policy
C. Name of the Health and Safety Adviser
D. Company Director’s home address
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 1.12
Employers have to produce a written Health and Safety Policy statement when:
A. A contract commences Right Answer: B
This is a specific requirement of the Health and Safety
B. They employ five people or more
at Work Act.
C. The safety representative requests it
D. The HSE notifies them
QUESTION 1.13
Companies employing five or more people must have a written Health and Safety Policy because:
A. The principal contractor gives them work on site Right Answer: B
B. The HSAWA 1974 requires it
C. The Social Security Act requires it
D. The trade unions require it
QUESTION 1.14
What do the letters HSE stand for?
A. Highly Safe Electrician Right Answer: D
The Health and Safety Executive was established
B. Health and Safety Exercise
under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974.
C. Health and Safety Examiner
D. Health and Safety Executive
QUESTION 1.15
The Health and Safety Executive is:
A. Part of the National Health Service Right Answer: B
The Health and Safety Executive is part of the
The regulatory body for the promotion of health
B.
Department for Work and Pensions.
and safety at work
C. The jury in health and safety court cases
D. Part of the police force
QUESTION 1.16
The Health and Safety at Work Act requires employers to provide what for their employees?
A. Adequate rest periods Right Answer: C
This is a specific requirement of Section 2 of the
B. Payment for work done
Health and Safety at Work Act.
C. A safe place of work
D. Suitable transport to work
QUESTION 1.17
The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 and any regulations made under the Act are:
Not compulsory, but should be complied with Right Answer: D
A.
if convenient
The requirements of health and safety law are
mandatory and failure to follow them can lead
B. Advisory to companies and individuals
to prosecution.
C. Practical advice for the employer to follow
D. Legally binding
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 1.18
Under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, which of the following have a duty to work safely?
A. Employees only Right Answer: D
Employers, employees and the self-employed all
B. The general public
have duties to work safely under the Act.
C. Employers only
D. All people at work
QUESTION 1.19
What is the MAXIMUM penalty that a Higher Court, can currently impose for a breach of the Health and Safety
at Work Act?
Right Answer: D
A. £20,000 fine and two years’ imprisonment
A Lower Court can impose a fine of up to £20,000 and/or
B. £15,000 fine and three years’ imprisonment
up to six months imprisonment for certain offences.
C. £1,000 fine and six months imprisonment
The potential fine in a Higher Court, however, is unlimited
and the term of imprisonment can be up to 2 years.
D. Unlimited fine and two years’ imprisonment
QUESTION 1.20
What do the letters ACOP stand for?
A. Accepted Code of Provisions Right Answer: C
An ACOP is a code of practice approved by the
B. Approved Condition of Practice
Health and Safety Executive (or the Health and Safety
C. Approved Code of Practice
Commission prior to April 2008).
D. Accepted Code of Practice
QUESTION 1.21
Where should you look for official advice on health and safety matters?
Right Answer: C
A. A set of health and safety guidelines provided by suppliers
The HSE is the UK enforcing body and its guidance
B. The health and safety rules as laid down by the employer
can be regarded as ‘official’.
C. Guidance issued by the Health and Safety Executive
D. A professionally approved guide book on regulations
QUESTION 1.22
Regulations that govern health and safety on construction sites:
A. Apply only to inexperienced workers Right Answer: D
The requirements of health and safety law are
B. Do not apply during ’out of hours’ working
mandatory, and failure to follow them can lead
C. Apply only to large companies
to prosecutions.
D. Are mandatory (that is, compulsory)
QUESTION 1.23
Which of the following statements is correct?
A. The duty for health and safety falls only on the employer Right Answer: B
This is a legal requirement under Section 7 of the
All employees must take reasonable care, not only
B.
Health & Safety at Work Act.
to protect themselves but also their colleagues
Employees have no responsibility for Health and
C.
Safety on site
D. Only the client is responsible for safety on site
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 1.24
Who of the following would you expect to be responsible for managing health and safety on site?
A. Foreman Right Answer: B
The responsibility for management of health and
B. Your employer
safety at work rests with the employer.
C. Main sub-contractor
D. HSE Inspector
QUESTION 1.25
Which of the following is correct for risk assessment?
A. It is a good idea but not essential Right Answer: C
There is a legal requirement for all work to be suitably
B. Only required to be done for hazardous work
risk assessed.
C. Must always be done
D. Only required on major jobs
QUESTION 1.26
In the context of a risk assessment, what do you understand by the term risk?
A. An unsafe act or condition Right Answer: D
Hazard and risk are not the same. Risk reflects
B. Something with the potential to cause injury
the chance of being harmed by a hazard.
C. Any work activity that can be described as dangerous
The likelihood that harm from a particular hazard
D.
will occur
QUESTION 1.27
Who would you expect to carry out a risk assessment on your working site?
Right Answer: D
A. The CDM Co-ordinator
A risk assessment must be conducted by a
B. A visiting HSE Inspector
‘competent person’.
C. The construction project designer
D. A competent person
QUESTION 1.28
What is a HAZARD?
A. Where an accident is likely to happen Right Answer: C
Examples of hazards include: a drum of acid, breeze
B. An accident waiting to happen
blocks on an elevated plank; cables running across
C. Something with the potential to cause harm
a floor.
D. The likelihood of something going wrong
QUESTION 1.29
What must be done before any work begins?
A. Emergency plan Right Answer: B
This is a legal requirement of the Management
B. Assessment of risk
of Health and Safety at Work Regulations.
C. Soil assessment
D. Geological survey
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 1.30
Complete the following sentence: A risk assessment:
A. Is a piece of paper required by law Right Answer: C
Risk assessment involves a careful review of what can
B. Prevents accidents
cause harm and the practical measures to be taken to
C. Is a means of analysing what might go wrong
reduce the risk of harm.
D. Isn’t particularly useful
QUESTION 1.31
Why would your supervisor ask you to read the method statement and risk assessment before you start your next job?
A. They think you have got nothing better to do Right Answer: B
The supervisor must, by law, keep workers advised
The documents contain information on how to carry
B.
of significant risks, and control measures.
out the job in a safe manner
C. They wouldn’t as they think they are a waste of time
As someone has taken the time and trouble to write
D.
them, you might as well read them
QUESTION 1.32
What do the blue and white health and safety signs tell you?
A. Things you must do Right Answer: A
Blue and white signs show a ‘mandatory’ requirement.
B. Where the nearest fire exit is
C. The hazards in the area
D. Things you must not do
QUESTION 1.33
What colours are emergency exit signs?
Right Answer: A
A. Green and white
The colours are prescribed in the Health and Safety
B. Red and yellow
(Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations.
C. Red and white
D. Blue and white
QUESTION 1.34
What is the main colour on a safety sign stating that you must NOT do something?
A. Blue Right Answer: C
Prohibitory signs are round and feature a black
B. Green
pictogram on a white background with red edging
C. Red
and diagonal line.
D. Yellow
QUESTION 1.35
The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of signs. What colours are used
on a sign indicating a warning, for example ‘Fork-lift trucks operating’?
A. Blue and white Right Answer: C
Warning signs are triangular and feature a black
B. Green and white
pictogram on a yellow background with black edging.
C. Yellow and black
D. Red and white
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 1.36
The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are
used on a sign indicating a prohibited activity, for example ‘No access for pedestrians’ ?
A. Green and white Right Answer: B
Prohibitory signs are round and feature a black
B. Red, black and white
pictogram on a white background with red edging
C. Blue and white
and diagonal line.
D. Yellow and black
QUESTION 1.37
The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are
used on a sign indicating a mandatory activity, for example ‘Safety helmets must be worn’?
A. Green and white Right Answer: C
Mandatory signs are round and feature a white
B. Red, black and white
pictogram on a blue background.
C. Blue and white
D. Yellow and black
QUESTION 1.38
The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are
used on a sign indicating a safe condition, for example First Aid kit?
Right Answer: D
A. Red, black and white
Emergency escape and first-aid signs are rectangular
B. Blue and white
or square and feature a white pictogram on a green
C. Yellow and black
background.
D. Green and white
QUESTION 1.39
Why should regular inspections of the workplace take place?
A. To check whether the working environment is safe Right Answer: A
The Management of Health and Safety at Work
B. To check that all employees are present
Regulations require that routine inspections of
C. To check that everyone is doing their job
workplaces are carried out to ensure that preventative
and protective measures are in place and effective.
D. To prepare for a visit from an HSE Inspector
QUESTION 1.40
How can you help to prevent accidents?
Right Answer: C
A. Don’t report them
Action to improve safety can only be taken if the risk
B. Know how to get help quickly
is known about. Employees have a duty of care to
C. Report any unsafe conditions
other employees.
D. Know where the first-aid kit is kept
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
MANUAL HANDLING OPERATIONS
QUESTION 2.1
If there is a risk of injury from lifting loads what should you think about first?
Right Answer: A
A. Whether the load needs to be lifted at all
If possible, it is best to avoid the risks from lifting
B. What the weight of the load is
altogether. This is the preferred requirement laid down
C. Where to hold the load when lifting
in the Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992.
D. How to lift the load
QUESTION 2.2
Before performing manual lifting what is the first thing you should do?
A. Check the headroom Right Answer: C
If you assess the whole task first, you will have a clear
B. Weigh the article
idea of possible hazards and how to overcome them,
C. Assess the whole task
before lifting.
D. Kick it to see if it is stable
QUESTION 2.3
Which is the part of your body MOST LIKELY to be injured during a manual handling activity which involves
moving a heavy load?
Right Answer: D
A. Knees
HSE statistics show that most manual handling injuries
B. Forearms
are to the back.
C. Chest
D. Back
QUESTION 2.4
What should you do if your supervisor asks you to move something that you find is too heavy to lift?
A. Give it a try using correct lifting methods Right Answer: C
The HSE advises employees to inform the employer
B. Ask your mates to assist in the lift
if they identify hazardous handling activities.
C. Inform your supervisor that it is too heavy
D. Get a forklift truck or lifting tackle
QUESTION 2.5
What would you NOT consider in making a judgement of the risks from a load?
Right Answer: B
A. Its size and condition
A, C and D can all affect the difficulty of lifting an object.
B. Its colour
C. Its weight
D. Its centre of gravity
QUESTION 2.6
When moving a load fitted with wheels which of the following is generally true?
A. Pushing and pulling are equally risky Right Answer: C
The operator should try to push rather than pull when
B. Pulling is preferable to pushing
moving a load, provided they can see over it and control
C. Pushing is preferable to pulling
steering and stopping.
D. It is safer to pick it up and carry it
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 2.7
A manual handling operation is defined as which one of the following?
A. Automated effort Right Answer: B
Manual handling covers human effort only.
B. Human effort
C. Mechanised and human effort
D. Mechanised effort
QUESTION 2.8
What is the MAXIMUM weight that an individual may lift?
A. The weight they can lift comfortably Right Answer: A
There are no strict weight limits – the priority is to
B. Whatever the supervisor instructs
avoid injury.
C. 35kg provided that it has no sharp edges
D. 15kg provided that it is a compact load
QUESTION 2.9
What is the most common type of injury resulting from lifting loads from the floor?
A. Vibration white finger Right Answer: D
As shown by HSE statistics.
B. Grazes to the knees
C. Head injuries
D. Back injuries
QUESTION 2.10
Where a load has to be lifted manually, what is the employer required to do by law?
A. Calculate the cost of the exercise Right Answer: C
This is a specific requirement of the Manual Handling
B. Determine the number of people required
Operations regulations 1992.
C. Assess the risk of the task
D. Assess the time the job will take
QUESTION 2.11
Which of the following is advisable when lifting a load manually?
Right Answer: C
A. Keep legs straight, bend back, use power of legs
Stooping can increase the stress on the lower back.
Bend the knees, keep the back straight, use power
B.
However, stooping slightly may be preferable to
of back
adopting a squatting posture, which can place
Bend the knees, keep the back as straight as possible,
excessive loads on knees and hips.
C.
use power of legs
D. Keep legs and back straight, use power of legs
QUESTION 2.12
In manual handling, which of the following general statements is true?
Right Answer: C
A. You should keep your back bent when lifting
This is a recommendation (INDG143).
Anyone can carry any load as long as they are
B.
strong enough
Large loads should be broken down into smaller loads
C.
where possible
D. Loads should be held at arm’s length while carrying
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 2.13
What is the recommended limit for a compact load, that can be safely carried by a fit, male worker?
Right Answer: D
A. 50kg
This figure is in HSE guidance, and relates to lifting
B. 40kg
and lowering at elbow height.
C. 20kg
D. 25kg
QUESTION 2.14
Where there has been a major change in a manual handling operation, what should the employer do?
A. Monitor the operation being undertaken Right Answer: C
This is a specific requirement of the Manual Handling
B. Review the number of people involved
Operations regulations 1992.
C. Review the original risk assessment
D. Monitor the cost of change
QUESTION 2.15
What should be the first consideration when you are about to lift a load on your own?
Right Answer: A
A. Assess whether it is safe to lift it on your own
Employees should assess whether there is a risk of
B. Ensure you wear appropriate PPE
injury before lifting. If they are not sure they should
C. Wear gloves and grip properly
seek advice from their supervisor.
D. Ensure you lift with a bent back
QUESTION 2.16
Which of the following would NOT make a load easier to handle manually?
A. Painting it a bright colour Right Answer: A
B. Securing the load so that it does not shift unexpectedly
C. Reducing its weight
D. Providing suitable handles or hand grips
QUESTION 2.17
If there is a risk of injury from moving loads what should you think about?
Right Answer: A
A. Advising your supervisor
This is a requirement of the Manual Handling
B. Carrying it anyway
Operations regulations 1992.
C. Dragging it all the way
D. Getting someone to assist you over the distance
QUESTION 2.18
As an approximate guide the manual handling capacity of a two person team is:
A. The sum of their individual capacities Right Answer: D
This is contained in HSE guidance on the Manual
B. The capacity of the strongest individual
Handling Operations Regulations 1992.
C. The capacity of the weakest individual
D. Two thirds the sum of their individual capacities
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 2.19
What does ’Kinetic lifting’ mean?
Right Answer: C
A. Using a crane or some other mechanical means
B. Using a forklift truck or pallet truck
C. Lifting in the most safe and effective way
D. Getting a friend to help you with the load
QUESTION 2.20
What should you do first before lifting or moving a load?
A. Put on gloves Right Answer: B
You or your employer must assess the risk of injury
B. Assess the weight
before lifting.
C. Keep a straight back
D. Bend your knees
QUESTION 2.21
Before picking up a load, you should:
Right Answer: D
A. Bend your knees
You or your employer must assess the risk of injury
B. Choose a pair of gloves
before lifting.
C. Ask a work mate to help you
D. Assess the risks
QUESTION 2.22
When picking up an object, you should:
A. Bend your arms Right Answer: D
Generally, the legs should do most of the work when
B. Bend your back
lifting a load.
C. Wear a back brace
D. Bend your knees
QUESTION 2.23
When judging ‘individual capability’ for manual handling, you should assume:
Right Answer: C
A. All women are equally capable
Assessing ability for manual handling must be done
B. Young men are weak
on an individual basis.
C. All people are different
D. All men are equally capable
QUESTION 2.24
When an article has to be moved for a long distance, you should:
A. Use a barrow or trolley Right Answer: A
The use of handling aids can reduce the risk of injury.
B. Get someone else to do it for you
C. Drag it all the way
D. Carry it all the way
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 2.25
Which is the correct way to lift a load?
Right Answer: B
A. Squat near load, bend back and use leg muscles
Handling techniques which allow the use of relatively
Squat near to the load, keeping the back as straight
B.
strong leg muscles rather than those of the back
as possible and using leg muscles
are preferable.
C. Keep feet apart and bend back
D. Keep feet together and bend back
QUESTION 2.26
Which would you consider to be generally correct when lifting a load?
A. Larger loads should be split into smaller loads if possible Right Answer: A
This is a recommendation in HSE guidance (INDG143).
B. Keep the load away from the body
C. When lifting you should bend your back
The feet should be together and the load lifted at
D.
arm’s length
QUESTION 2.27
If a load has an uneven centre of gravity, how should you lift it?
A. Keep the heaviest side of the load away from you Right Answer: C
There is less risk of injury if a weight’ s centre of gravity
B. Keep the heaviest side of the load on the strongest arm
is near the torso.
C. Keep the heaviest side of the load towards you
D. Keep the heaviest side of the load on the weakest arm
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
REPORTING ACCIDENTS
QUESTION 3.1
What should you ensure if you suffer an injury through a manual handling operation?
Right Answer: B
A. You get paid for the job
All injuries must be recorded in the company accident
B. The injury is recorded
book (BI 510).
C. You get help and carry on working
D. You take time off work
QUESTION 3.2
Why should a serious accident be reported to the enfourcing authority?
Right Answer: B
A. It helps the site find out what caused it
Serious accidents (specified injuries or those resulting
B. It is legal requirement
in an absence of over 7 days) must be reported to the
enforcing authority under the Reporting of Injuries,
C. So that the site manager can see who is to blame
Diseases and Dangerous Occurrencs Regulations
(RIDDOR).
D. So that the company will be held responsible
QUESTION 3.3
What immediate action should you take if you suffer an injury through carrying a load?
Right Answer: B
A. Advise your doctor of your injury
All injuries must be recorded in the company
B. Tell your supervisor or employer
accident book (BI 510).
C. Tell your working companion
D. Carry on working as best you can
QUESTION 3.4
Under RIDDOR, which one of the following must be reported to the enforcing authority?
Accidents where the injured person wishes
Right Answer: B
A.
to make a claim
This is one of a number of reportable ‘specified injuries’
B. Fracture other than to fingers, thumbs or toes and must be reported to the enforcing authority
under Reporting of injuries. Diseases and Dangerous
C. All ‘near misses’ even if no one is hurt
Occurances Regulations (RIDDDOR).
D. All accidents casing injury
QUESTION 3.5
Which of the following has the power to examine an accident record?
Right Answer: A
A. An HSE inspector
HSE inspectors have a range of powers, including
B. An Insurance company
this one.
C. A doctor
D. A workmate
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 3.6
Which of the following should be recorded in the accident book following an accident?
Right Answer: A
A. The date and time the accident occurred
The information to be entered in an accident book (BI
510) includes when and where the accident happened,
B. Your date of birth
the name and address and occupation of the person
who had the accident and details of how the accident
C. The weather conditions
happened and the injuries suffered. The weather
conditions would only be included if they contributed
D. Your National Insurance Number
to the accident.
QUESTION 3.7
Which one of the following accounts for most accidents each year on construction sites?
Right Answer: D
A. Strikes by moving vehicles
HSE Statistics show clearly that there are more slips,
B. Electrocution
trips and falls than any other types of accident on site.
C. Trench collapses
D. Slips, trips and falls
QUESTION 3.8
Which of the following is NOT classified as a specified injury to a worker under RIDDOR?
A. A fractured finger Right Answer: A
Amputation of an arm, hand, finger, thumb, leg, foot
B. A fractured arm
or toe are classified as specified injuries, as are bone
C. Amputation of a finger
fractures other than to fingers, thumbs or toes.
D. A broken wrist
QUESTION 3.9
Which one of the following should you do if you witness a serious accident on site?
A. Pretend you saw nothing Right Answer: D
If the supervisor is aware of an accident he can take
B. Say nothing in case you get in trouble
steps to prevent a recurrence. The employer also
C. Discuss what to do with your workmates
has legal duties to report certain incidents to the
enforcing authority.
D. Tell your supervisor what you saw happening
QUESTION 3.10
A workmate tells you that he witnessed an accident the previous day and the victim was taken to hospital. He asks
you for advice on what he should do. Do you tell them to:
A. Speak to the site nurse about what he saw Right Answer: B
If the supervisor is aware of an accident he can take
B. Tell their supervisor that they saw what happened
steps to prevent a recurrence. The employer also has
Telephone the hospital to find out how the injured
C. legal duties to report certain incidents to the enforcing
person is
authority.
Say nothing to anyone in case they get someone
D.
in trouble
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 3.11
If a person at work suffers an injury (other than a specified injury) due to an accident at work, it is reportable under
RIDDOR if they are incapacitated for work for:
Right Answer: B
A. Over 1 day
An over-seven-day injury is one which is not a specified
injury but results in the injured person being away
B. Over 7 days
from work or unable to do the full range of their normal
duties for more than seven days (including any days
C. Over half a day
they wouldn’t normally be expected to work such as
weekends, rest days or holidays) not counting the day
D. Over 2 days
of the injury itself.
QUESTION 3.12
What must an employer do with their accident records following completion of a construction project?
Right Answer: C
A. They are sent to the Health and Safety Executive
Accident records must be kept by an employer for at
They are destroyed on site with other non-essential
B.
documents least three years.
C. They are kept safe by the employer
D. They are sent to the employer’s insurance company
QUESTION 3.13
At work who would you report a dangerous occurrence to?
A. The emergency services Right Answer: B
Under RIDDOR. an employer has a legal duty to report
B. Your supervisor or employer
certain work-related accidents, but to do this they will
C. Another employee
need to know that an accident has occurred.
D. The client for the project
QUESTION 3.14
Following a reportable dangerous occurrence when must the enforcing authority be informed?
Right Answer: C
A. Within 5 days
The enforcing authority must be notified by the quickest
B. Within 48 hours
practicable means.
C. Without delay
D. Within 24 hours
QUESTION 3.15
Accidents causing any injury should always be recorded in:
A. The site engineer’s day book Right Answer: B
All accidents should be recorded in the accident book
B. Your employer’s accident recording system
(Bl 510).
C. Your personal diary
D. The main contractor’s diary
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 3.16
Which one of the following is classified as a reportable occupational disease under RIODOR?
Right Answer: B
A. Mental disorder
Certain occupational diseases likely to have been
B. Occupational asthma
caused or made worse by work are reportable under
RIODOR. This would include occupational asthma
C. Amputation
where the person’ s work includes significant or regular
exposure to a known respiratory sensitizer.
D. Influenza
QUESTION 3.17
When a person is injured at work, who should enter the details in the accident book?
A. The injured person’s supervisor Right Answer: B
This is the procedure for recording accidents internally
B. The injured person or anyone acting for them
in the accident book (Bl 510).
C. The site manager or engineer
D. The site safety manager
QUESTION 3.18
If you are involved in a minor accident at work, whose duty is it to report it to site management?
Right Answer: C
A. Any witness to the accident
Employers rely on employees to advise them of
B. The police, fire or ambulance who attend
occurrences at work.
C. It is your own responsibility
D. The site foreman should report it
QUESTION 3.19
You have suffered an accident at work which has made you incapable of your normal work for over 7 days. Which of the
following actions MUST be taken by your employer?
Right Answer: C
A. The emergency services are asked to attend the site
An over-seven-day injury is one which is not a specified
injury but results in the injured person being away
B. The local hospital is informed
from work or unable to do the full range of their normal
duties for more than seven days (including any days
C. The relevant enforcing authority is informed
they wouldn’ t normally be expected to work such as
weekends, rest days or holidays) not counting the day
D. A deduction is made from your wages for days lost
of the injury itself.
QUESTION 3.20
The collapse of scaffolding is only notifiable to the enforcing authority as a reportable dangerous occurrence when the
scaffolding is which one of the following?
A. Over 15 metres in height Right Answer: D
This is one of the requirements of RIDDOR.
B. Any height
C. Over 10 metres in height
D. Over 5 metres in height
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 3.21
If there is a fatal accident on site, when must the Health and Safety Executive be informed?
Right Answer: A
A. Without delay
The enforcing authority must be notified by the
B. Within 10 days
quickest practicable means.
C. Within 7 days
D. Within 5 days
QUESTION 3.22
Under which of the following circumstances should an accident be recorded in the site’s accident book?
A. When an accident causes damage to plant or equipment Right Answer: D
An accident causing an injury to an employee at work
Only when a person is injured and will be off work for
B.
should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510).
more than seven days
When the injury is serious enough for first aid to
C.
be needed
When an accident causes injury to an employee
D.
while at work
QUESTION 3.23
Which of the following have to be entered into the accident book?
A. All accidents causing any damage Right Answer: B
An accident causing an injury to an employee at work
B. All accidents causing an injury
should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510).
C. Only accidents causing serious injury
D. Only accidents causing time off work
QUESTION 3.24
Under which of the following circumstances must injury accidents be recorded in the accident book?
A. Only if you break a bone Right Answer: C
An accident causing an injury to an employee at work
B. Only if you have time off work
should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510).
C. Any time they occur
D. Only if you need to go to hospital
QUESTION 3.25
An entry must be made in the accident book when:
A. The person has been off sick for over seven days Right Answer: C
An accident causing an injury to an employee at work
B. Management thinks it is appropriate
should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510).
C. An accident causes personal injury to an employee
The severity of the accident may result in a
D.
compensation claim
QUESTION 3.26
Which of the following MUST be recorded in an accident book after you have had an accident?
Right Answer: C
A. Your National Insurance number
The information to be entered in an accident book
B. Your date of birth
(Bl 510) includes when and where the accident
happened, the name, address and occupation of the
C. Your occupation
person who had the accident and details of how the
accident happened and the injuries suffered.
D. Your phone number
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 3.27
Which of the following can you learn from an accident?
A combination of human error and mechanical failure
Right Answer: B
A.
always causes injury
An accident investigation should not only assess the
B. Ideas on how you would prevent it happening again cause, but also how similar accidents can be prevented
in the future.
C. That mechanical failures are most dangerous
D. How human error is always a cause
QUESTION 3.28
Could making an entry in the accident book help you if you later make a claim for compensation?
A. Only if it is a serious injury Right Answer: D
This is laid down in Social Security Legislation.
B. No
C. Only in the event of a fatality
D. Yes
QUESTION 3.29
Why is it important to report ‘near miss’ accidents to your employer?
Right Answer: C
A. It’s the law
HSE advises that ‘near misses’ should be investigated
B. To make the figures look good
to prevent their recurrence.
So lessons can be learned, preventing an accident
C.
next time
D. So that someone can be disciplined
QUESTION 3.30
Who should you report serious accidents to?
A. Your workmate Right Answer: B
If the supervisor is aware of an accident he can take
B. Your employer or supervisor
steps to prevent a recurrence. The employer also
C. The police
has legal duties to report certain incidents to the
enforcing authority.
D. The ambulance service
QUESTION 3.31
What is the aim of carrying out an accident investigation?
Right Answer: A
A. To determine the cause(s) and prevent similar accidents
An accident investigation should not only assess the
B. To establish what injuries were sustained
cause, but also how similar accidents can be prevented
C. To find out who is at fault
in the future.
D. To establish the cost of any damage incurred
QUESTION 3.32
You have witnessed a serious accident on your site and are interviewed by an HSE inspector. You should:
A. Tell the inspector what your mates said you should say Right Answer: C
This is good practice, but it can also be an offence
B. Ask your supervisor what you should say to the inspector
to withhold important information from an inspector.
Co-operate fully with the inspector and tell them exactly
C.
what you saw
D. Don’t tell them anything
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT AT WORK
QUESTION 4.1
When working in dusty conditions, what of the following would give the LEAST level of protection?
Right Answer: D
A. Compressed airline breathing helmet
Protection factors are given in HSE publication HSG53
B. Positive pressure powered respirator
‘Respiratory protective equipment at work – A practical
C. Self-contained breathing apparatus
guide’.
D. Half mask dust respirator
QUESTION 4.2
In hot weather which one of the following is correct with regard to safety helmets?
You can take off your helmet while working inside Right Answer: B
A.
the building
On construction sites, despite controls being put in
place, there will always be situations where a risk of head
B. You must continue to wear your helmet
injury remains. Taking off your helmet would put you at a
much greater risk of a head injury and any unauthorised
C. You can drill holes in your safety hat for ventilation
modification would be in breach of legal requirements
D. You do not need to wear your helmet and could render the helmet next to useless.
QUESTION 4.3
Which one of the following should you do if your personal protective equipment (PPE) is damaged?
A. Obtain new equipment when available Right Answer: B
Employees are required to report any defective PPE
B. Report to your Supervisor without delay
to their employer (PPE at Work Regulations 1992,
C. Reduce the amount of time you sue it
Regulation 7).
D. Carry on working
QUESTION 4.4
If personal protective equipment (PPE ) is defective, what should you do?
Right Answer: C
A. Complain to the Health and Safety Inspector
Employees are required to report any defective PPE
B. Get your workmate to mend it if possible
to their employer (PPE at Work Regulations 1992,
C. Report it to your supervisor
Regulation 7).
D. Repair if possible and continue to use it
QUESTION 4.5
In normal use, what item of PPE is NOT essential for the operator of a cartridge-operated tool, such as a nail gun?
A. Safety eyewear Right Answer: C
Wellingtons do not offer protection against the specific
B. Hearing protection
risks associated with the use of a cartridge-operated
C. Wellington boots
tool, although safety footwear must always be work
when there is a risk of a foot injury.
D. Safety helmet
QUESTION 4.6
Can you opt out of wearing personal protective equipment (PPE)?
Right Answer: C
A. Yes, by informing the site supervisor
You cannot legally ‘opt out’ of being protected from
B. Yes, by writing officially to your employer
significant risks at work. This includes wearing the
C. No, you cannot opt out
necessary PPE.
D. Yes, if it is uncomfortable
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 4.7
What is the most important item of personal protective equipment (PPE) when working on or near a highway?
Right Answer: D
A. Safety footwear
A high visibility vest is the most important of PPE
B. Waterproof clothing
however, the other items of PPE may also be required.
C. Hard hat
D. High visibility vest
QUESTION 4.8
If you are drilling into concrete with a masonry drill, in which one of the following circumstances will you need to wear
eye protection?
Right Answer: A
A. Always
Suitable eye protection must always be worn when
B. Only when drilling overhead
working with power-driven tools where chippings are
C. Only if the drill is bigger than 10mm
likely to fly or abrasive materials could be propelled.
D. Not if drilling into the floor
QUESTION 4.9
When must you wear all personal protective equipment (PPE) provided by your employer?
A. As instructed by your employer Right Answer: A
Under the PPE at Work Regulations 1992, employees
B. Only if it fits
must wear PPE as instructed.
C. When you want to
D. Only when you need to
QUESTION 4.10
When MUST an employer provide their employees with personal protective equipment (PPE)?
When they may be exposed to a risk to their health Right Answer: A
A.
and safety which cannot be controlled another way
As required by regulation 4 of the PPE Regulations.
B. Twice a year
C. If the client or main contractor specifies it in the contract
D. Every 5 years
QUESTION 4.11
What type of eye protection would you wear when using a cartridge-operated tool, such as a nail gun?
A. Impact goggles Right Answer: A
When using a cartridge-operated tool, such as a nail
B. Sun glasses
gun, shatter proof goggles should be worn.
C. Safety spectacles
D. Chemical protection glasses
QUESTION 4.12
Which of the following must your safety helmet comply with to meet with the requirements of the Personal Protective
Equipment at Work Regulations?
Right Answer: A
A. It can be adjusted to suit your head size
An assessment of the suitability of head protection
B. It is a good visible colour
would include consideration of whether it can be
adjusted to suit the individual who is to wear it, that it
C. It has a label with your name on it
is compatible with the work to be done and that it is
comfortable to wear.
D. It is less than 1 year old
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 4.13
In which of the following ways should you wear your safety helmet?
Right Answer: D
A. With the peak raised to deflect falling material
Any item of personal protective equipment must
B. With the helmet back to front
be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s
C. With the peak raised to give good vision
instructions, which will include how to correctly fit
and wear it and what its limitations are.
D. Square on your head, properly adjusted
QUESTION 4.14
When an employee has been issued with eye protection, what are their duties under the Personal Protective Equipment
at Work Regulations?
Right Answer: C
A. To ensure that they are the right type of protector
Regulation 10(2) requires that every employee shall use
B. Not to loan the equipment to other operatives
any PPE in accordance with the training and instruction
To use the protection in accordance with training
received.
C.
and instruction
D. To pay for replacement of lost eye protection
QUESTION 4.15
When should you wear safety footwear on site?
A. Only when working on scaffolds Right Answer: B
Suitable safety footwear should be worn if there is a
B. When there is a risk of a foot injury
risk of injury from objects falling onto the foot or sharp
C. Only when working outdoors
objects, such as nails, penetrating the sole.
D. Only if the site conditions are wet
QUESTION 4.16
With regard to the use of personal protective equipment (PPE), which one of the following statements is true?
If you do not use the personal protective equipment
Right Answer: B
A.
(PPE) provided you will probably not come to any harm
PPE is there to protect the individual. Wearing PPE
Personal protective equipment (PPE) protects only the
does not protect other people nearby.
B.
user from the dangers present
Personal protective equipment (PPE) need only be
C.
provided if it is not too expensive
Personal protective equipment (PPE) need only be used
D.
if it is available
QUESTION 4.17
Which of the following statements is TRUE when an employer issues personal protective equipment (PPE)?
Right Answer: B
A. The employer can charge you for the full cost of it
Employers cannot charge for PPE such as hard hats,
B. The employer cannot charge you for it
gloves, required by law (and the bulk of PPE is required
C. The employer can charge you for up to half the cost of it
by law).
The employer can only charge you for it if you lose or
D.
damage it
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 4.18
Which one of the following must apply to any hard hat provided?
Right Answer: A
A. It is CE or UKCA marked
All PPE should be CE – marked, indicating that it meets
B. It is less than 5 years old
the basic health and safety requirements.
C. It is less than 1 year old
D. It is less than 2 years old
QUESTION 4.19
When using personal protective equipment (PPE) legally you must do which of the following?
A. Not interfere with it or misuse it Right Answer: A
Interfering with or misusing items provided in the
B. Replace it at your own expense if it is damaged
interests of health, safety or welfare is an offence
C. Return it to the manufacturer when damaged
under the HSW Act 1974 (Section 8).
D. Clean it properly once a week
QUESTION 4.20
If it is necessary for an employee to use personal protective equipment, who has a duty to provide it?
Right Answer: C
A. The trade union
This is a requirement of the PPE at Work Regulations
B. The employee
1992 (Regulation 4).
C. The employer
D. The principal contractor
QUESTION 4.21
When should a safety helmet be worn on site?
At all times unless there is no foreseeable risk of injury Right Answer: A
A.
to the head other than by falling
The circumstances when there is no foreseeable risk of
head injury from falling or swinging objects or striking
B. When you are out in the open air
the head against something will be very limited in most
C. When walking to and from a place of work
construction work.
D. Only when something may fall
QUESTION 4.22
A colleague has drilled holes in the top of their safety helmet because the weather is hot. Is this:
A. Acceptable if the holes are small Right Answer: D
Interfering with or misusing items provided in the
B. Their choice
interests of health, safety or welfare is an offence
C. Acceptable
under the HSW Act 1974 (section 8).
D. In breach of legal requirements
QUESTION 4.23
Who has a duty to provide PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) for use by an employee?
A. The employer Right Answer: A
This is a requirement of the PPE at Work Regulations
B. The principal contractor
1992 (Regulation 4).
C. The employee
D. The client
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 4.24
When would it be appropriate to wear a bump-cap instead of a safety helmet?
Right Answer: A
When there is no foreseeable risk of injury from falling or
A.
swinging objects
Industrial scalp protectors (bump caps) can
protect against striking fixed obstacles, scalping or
B. In warm weather
entanglements. They do not provide suitable protection
C. When working in excavations
against falling or swinging objects.
D. When working on a ladder
QUESTION 4.25
How can you protect your eyesight while working on site?
Right Answer: C
A. By squinting
B. By not looking directly at what you are doing
C. By wearing the correct type of eye protection
D. By wearing sunglasses
QUESTION 4.26
When is head protection required to be worn on a construction site to comply with the Personal Protective
Equipment at Work Regulations?
Right Answer: D
A. At all times except by those who are self employed
If there is no risk of injury to the head, then hard hats
are not required by law. However, on construction sites,
B. Only when you feel like it
despite controls being in place, there will almost always
be situations where a risk of head injury remains and
C. At all times unless you are working on scaffold
require head protection to be worn. Site rules will also
require the wearing of head protection other than in any
At all times unless there is no foreseeable risk of injury
D.
designated safe areas.
to the head other than by falling
QUESTION 4.27
Why should a high visibility vest be worn when working on roads?
A. So road users and plant operators can see you Right Answer: A
Many workers are struck and injured, often seriously,
B. Because you were told to do so
by moving vehicles.
C. Because it will keep you warm
D. So that your mates can see you
QUESTION 4.28
When considering what measures to take to protect people’s health and safety, PPE should always be regarded as:
A. The last resort Right Answer: A
Engineering controls and safe systems of work should
B. The first line of defence
always be considered first.
C. The best way to tackle the job
D. The only practical measure
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
HEALTH AND HYGIENE
QUESTION 5.1
Exposure to asbestos fibres may cause which one of the following?
Right Answer: D
A. Dermatitis
Breathing in asbestos fibres can also lead to a
B. Asthma
number of other diseases, including lung cancer
C. Glandular fever
and mesothelioma.
D. Asbestosis
QUESTION 5.2
Asbestos is suspected in the workplace, during renovation do you:
A. Remove it Right Answer: D
Competent advice must be sought, to prevent
B. Paint it
exposure to the worker or others, either at the time,
C. Ignore it
or subsequently.
D. Seek guidance immediately
QUESTION 5.3
Which of the following statements about asbestos is TRUE?
Right Answer: C
A. Asbestos is not really a hazard to health
All forms of asbestos can cause fatal diseases.
B. White asbestos is safe to use
C. All asbestos can be a hazard to health
D. Only brown and blue asbestos are a hazard to health
QUESTION 5.4
While working you discover material you think could be asbestos. What should you do?
Clear any dust and fragments, put them in a bin then
Right Answer: C
A.
carry on working
It is essential to stop work if asbestos is found or
B. Inform the site nurse
suspected, and await competent advice on what
to do next.
Stop working immediately and report your suspicions
C.
to your supervisor
Dampen the material to prevent further dust being
D.
created, then carry on working
QUESTION 5.5
Can you tell by the smell of a product whether it is likely to cause harm?
A. No Right Answer: A
Many harmful substances have no smell.
B. Only within an enclosed space
C. Yes
D. Only if you have been trained
QUESTION 5.6
How would you recognise a hazardous substance?
A. By a symbol on the container Right Answer: A
A supplier of a packaged hazardous substance must
B. By its smell
include a label on the packaging incorporating one or
C. The colour of the label on the container
more hazard symbols alerting users to the dangers
posed by the chemical.
D. It will be in a suitable container
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 5.7
Which of the following does NOT cause skin problems?
Right Answer: C
A. Bitumens
Asbestos is potentially very harmful if inhaled, but does
B. Solvents
not affect the skin significantly.
C. Asbestos
D. Epoxy resins
QUESTION 5.8
When an assessment of hazardous substances has been carried out under the COSHH Regulations, the risks and control
measures should be explained to:
Right Answer: A
A. The operatives using the substance
All those working with the hazardous substances
B. All employees on site
in question need to know about any risks.
C. The accounts department
D. The person in charge of the stores
QUESTION 5.9
If your hands are very dirty, what should you use to get them clean?
A. White Spirit Right Answer: C
The other substances can remove natural oils from
B. Paraffin
the skin.
C. Soap and water
D. Thinners
QUESTION 5.10
The presence of rats on site creates a risk of catching Weil’ s disease. What is the EASIEST PRACTICAL MEASURE
that you can take to discourage the presence of rats?
Right Answer: A
A. Avoid leaving scraps of food lying about
The easiest solution is to avoid leaving food around,
B. Lay traps containing rat poison
since this is what attracts vermin.
C. Contact the local Environmental Health Officer
D. Bring a large cat on site
QUESTION 5.11
Why is personal hygiene so important?
A. So you don’t smell Right Answer: C
B. Because the COSHH regulations require it
C. To protect your own and others’ health
D. To stop you catching something nasty
QUESTION 5.12
If you have been handling lead, how is it most likely to get into your blood stream?
Right Answer: D
A. By not wearing safety goggles
The route into the body is ingestion, normally from
B. By not reporting the matter to the HSE
lead contamination on the hands.
C. By not using the correct safety footwear
D. By not washing your hands before eating
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 5.13
The number of toilets provided on site depends on:
Right Answer: D
A. The type of work being completed
Guidance on the provision of welfare facilities is given
B. The ratio of male and female workers on site
in HSE publication ‘Health and Safety in Construction‘.
C. The duration of the work on site
D. The number of personnel on site
QUESTION 5.14
Which of the following is not required to be provided under the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations?
A. Toilet facilities Right Answer: C
Guidance on the provision of welfare facilities as
B. Washing facilities
required by COM is given in HSE publication ‘Health
C. Hot food
and Safety in Construction‘.
D. Drinking water
QUESTION 5.15
The extended use of powered hand-held tools and equipment may lead to which medical condition?
Right Answer: A
A. Vibration white finger
Hand-arm vibration can cause a range of conditions
B. Weil’s disease
(including vibration white finger) collectively known as
C. Asbestosis
hand-arm vibration syndrome, as well as diseases such
as carpal tunnel syndrome.
D. Dermatitis
QUESTION 5.16
What must your employer do if the daily personal noise exposure is at or exceeds 85 db(A)?
Provide hearing protection to those employees who Right Answer: B
A.
ask for it
This is an interim measure under the Control of Noise at
Work Regulations 2005 when the daily personal noise
Issue hearing protection to those exposed and ensure
B.
exposure is at or exceeds the upper exposure action
that it is worn
value of 85 dB(A). Exposure should subsequently be
C. Tell employees to buy their own hearing protection
reduced by implementing organizational or technical
measures.
D. Report it to the Health and Safety Executive
QUESTION 5.17
What are the lower and upper action values with regard to daily personal noise exposure, as defined in the Control of
Noise at Work Regulations 2005?
A. 85 dB(A) and 90 dB(A) Right Answer: B
Daily personal noise exposure is the average noise level
B. 80 dB(A) and 85 dB(A)
experienced by an individual over an 8 hour period.
C. 70 dB(A) and 80 dB(A)
D. 75 dB(A) and 85dB(A)
QUESTION 5.18
At or above what level of daily personal noise exposure does an employer have to provide hearing protection if it is
requested by an employee?
A. 90 dB(A) Right Answer: C
This is one of the duties of employers under the
B. 95 dB(A)
Control of Noise at Work Regulations 2005 when the
C. 80 dB(A)
lower exposure action value of 80 dB(A) is reached
or exceeded.
D. 85 dB(A)
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 5.19
The effects of damage to your hearing by long-term exposure to high noise levels:
Right Answer: B
A. Can be corrected by an operation
Hearing damage due to long-term noise exposure
B. Are permanent
is irreversible.
C. Will be reduced when you change jobs
D. Can be reversed to near normal with time
QUESTION 5.20
Hearing protection should be worn:
A. In designated areas Right Answer: A
Employees must wear hearing protectors when exposed
B. In noisy internal areas only
at or above the upper exposure action values and within
C. At any workplace
hearing protection zones.
D. Only on building sites
QUESTION 5.21
Wearing suitable hearing protection:
Right Answer: C
A. Stops you hearing distracting conversations
Hearing protection still allows some noise to reach the
B. Stops you hearing all noise
ear, but, if it has been correctly chosen, will reduce noise
C. Brings noise down to an acceptable level
levels to an acceptable level.
D. Repairs damaged hearing
QUESTION 5.22
Which of the following is one of the recommended means of protecting your hearing?
A. Rolled tissue paper Right Answer: D
The others are not considered to be suitable types
B. Cotton wool pads
of hearing protection.
C. Soft cloth pads
D. Ear defenders
QUESTION 5.23
Which of the following would NOT reduce the risks from hand-arm vibration when using a hammer action tool?
Right Answer: D
Selecting the lowest vibration tool that is suitable
A.
and which can do the work efficiently
Where tools require constant or frequent use, rotas will
avoid individuals having long exposure to vibration. The
B. Wearing gloves to keep the hands warm
use of low-vibration tools and keeping the hands warm
C. Working as a team to share the work out
in cold conditions will also reduce the risks.
D. Making sure one person does all the work with the tool
QUESTION 5.24
Which of the following animals can carry Weil’s disease?
A. Snake Right Answer: C
Weil’s disease is a serious and sometimes fatal infection
B. Sheep
that can be transmitted to humans by contact with
C. Rat
infected rats. Another form of Leptospirosis infection
can be transmitted from cattle to humans.
D. Pig
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 5.25
You are most likely to catch Weil’s disease (Leptospirosis) if you:
Right Answer: A
A. Work near wet ground, waterways or sewers
Anyone who is exposed to rat urine is at risk, particularly
B. Work near air conditioning units
sewer workers and farmers. Those in contact with canal
C. Fix showers or baths
or river water are also at risk.
D. Drink water from a standpipe
QUESTION 5.26
What should you do if the toilets on your site are continually dirty?
Right Answer: B
A. Ignore the problem – its normal on a construction site
How often welfare facilities on site require cleaning
B. Make sure you tell someone who can sort it out
will depend on the number of people on site and how
quickly they get dirty. The person in control of the site
C. Find some cleaning materials and clean it up yourself
should make sure someone is responsible for keeping
the facilities clean and tidy.
D. Ask in a nearby cafe or pub if you can use their toilets
QUESTION 5.27
Excessive sunlight on bare skin can cause which serious health problem?
Right Answer: D
A. Dermatitis
Ultraviolet rays in sunlight can cause sunburn and
B. Rickets
premature ageing of the skin. The most serious
C. Acne
effect, however, is an increased chance of developing
skin cancer.
D. Skin cancer
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
FIRE AND EMERGENCY
QUESTION 6.1
An emergency route(s) must be provided on construction sites to ensure:
Right Answer: C
A. Safe passage to the open air
B. Safe passage to the rest area
C. Safe passage to a secure place of safety
D. Safe passage to the ground from height
QUESTION 6.2
What action should you take if you discover a fire?
A. Leave it because you will get the blame Right Answer: B
Raising the alarm will reduce the risk to others,
B. Raise the alarm
particularly if the fire spreads.
C. Carry on working if it is safe to do so
D. Extinguish the fire without raising the alarm
QUESTION 6.3
If there had been a small fire, who should you report it to?
Right Answer: A
A. Your supervisor
The supervisor should be aware, so that further
B. The main contractor’s site agent
preventative measures can be considered.
C. The site’s fire marshal
D. The resident site engineer
QUESTION 6.4
If you discover a fire at work, what should you do first:
A. Telephone 999 Right Answer: D
Raising the alarm will reduce the risk to others,
B. Use a fire extinguisher to put it out
particularly if the fire spreads.
C. Run around looking for an alarm to sound
D. Raise the alarm and warn fellow workers
QUESTION 6.5
What is a fire assembly point?
Right Answer: A
A. The place to go when the fire alarm sounds
It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where
B. A place where the fire brigade goes to
supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the
C. A place where fire extinguishers are kept
event of a fire.
D. The place where the fire alarm is
QUESTION 6.6
Where would you go in the event of a fire?
A. To the canteen for a cup of tea Right Answer: B
It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where
B. To the fire assembly point
supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the
C. To the site hut
event of a fire.
D. To the fire to see what is going on
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 6.7
What should you do if you hear the fire alarm?
Right Answer: C
A. Ignore it because it might be someone playing around
It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where
B. Leave work for the day
supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the
C. Evacuate the premises to a designated place of safety
event of a fire.
D. Go towards the sound to find out what is going on
QUESTION 6.8
All new fire extinguishers are coloured red or of bright self-coloured metal. How do you know the difference between types?
A different colour panel or band is on the body of the Right Answer: A
A.
extinguishers
Different coloured bands show extinguisher types
e.g. black for CO2 and blue for dry powder.
During site induction, you will be told where the different
B.
types of extinguishers are
C. The weight and shape of the extinguisher
D. The type of extinguisher is written on a sign next to it
QUESTION 6.9
A black-labelled fire extinguisher contains:
A. Dry powder Right Answer: D
B. Water
C. Foam
D. Carbon dioxide
QUESTION 6.10
What is a blue-labelled fire extinguisher filled with?
Right Answer: C
A. Water
B. Foam
C. Dry powder
D. Carbon dioxide
QUESTION 6.11
Which fire extinguisher should not be used on flammable liquid fires?
A. Carbon dioxide Right Answer: C
Flammable liquids spread if attacked by water
B. Powder
extinguishers.
C. Water
D. Foam
QUESTION 6.12
What colour is a water filled fire extinguisher, or its label?
Right Answer: C
A. Black
B. Cream
C. Red
D. Green
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 6.13
When discharging carbon dioxide fire extinguishers, the nozzle:
Right Answer: C
A. Becomes warm
The expansion of CO2 gas coming out of the nozzle
B. Becomes very hot
causes rapid cooling.
C. Becomes very cold
D. Doesn’t change temperature
QUESTION 6.14
For fires involving spilled petrol, which types of fire extinguisher could you use?
A. Water, carbon dioxide or foam Right Answer: C
Flammable liquids, such as petrol, spread if attacked
B. Water, foam or dry powder
by water extinguishers.
C. Foam, carbon dioxide or dry powder
D. Water, carbon dioxide or dry powder
QUESTION 6.15
Which types of fire extinguishers should be used on electrical fires?
Right Answer: B
A. Foam and water
Liquids should not be used, since they may
B. Carbon dioxide and dry powder
conduct electricity.
C. Dry powder and foam
D. Water and carbon dioxide
QUESTION 6.16
A red-labelled fire extinguisher should NOT be used:
A. On wood fires Right Answer: B
Red denotes water. Liquids should not be used on
B. Where there is a risk of electrocution
electrical fires, since they can conduct electricity.
C. On burning clothes
D. On burning furniture
QUESTION 6.17
A workmate burns their hand on a piece of very hot metal. What should you do first?
Right Answer: D
A. Rub some cream or Vaseline into the burn
Burns need immediate and sustained cooling.
B. Cover the burn with something dry
C. Warn other people about the piece of hot metal
D. Put their hand in cold water if it is available
QUESTION 6.18
Which of the following items should not be in a first aid box?
A. Safety pins Right Answer: B
Drugs must not be kept in a first aid box (Health
B. Pain killers
and Safety guidance note INDG 214).
C. Disposable gloves
D. Triangular bandages
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 6.19
How often should a first-aider qualified in First Aid at Work (FAW) or Emergency First Aid at Work (EFAW) receive retraining?
Right Answer: C
A. Every six months
First Aid at Work (FAW) and Emergency First Aid at
Work (EFAW) certificates are valid for three years and
B. Every two years
first-aiders are required to undertake retraining at the
end of this period. However, the HSE also strongly
C. Every three years
recommends that first-aiders undertake annual
(half-day) refresher training.
D. Every four years
QUESTION 6.20
If you came across an injury on site, what is the first thing you should do?
A. Tell the casualty to visit their doctor Right Answer: C
Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should
B. Inform the HSE
be summoned immediately.
C. Contact a first-aider
D. Try and find out what happened
QUESTION 6.21
An employee has a fall and is obviously unconscious. What is the FIRST thing you should do?
A. Send someone for the first-aider Right Answer: A
Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should
B. Find out if there were any witnesses
be summoned immediately.
C. Try to protect them from any further injury
D. Put them in the recovery position
QUESTION 6.22
A labourer gets an electric shock; looks a bit pale but says they are alright. What should you do?
Right Answer: A
A. Send someone for the first-aider
Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should
B. Tell them to report it to their supervisor
be summoned immediately.
C. Go and check the electrics so it cannot happen again
D. See if they want a drink or a cigarette
QUESTION 6.23
Which of the following must an employer consider when making provisions for first aid?
A. How much working space will be wasted Right Answer: D
Employers must match first-aid provision to the nature
B. How much will it cost
of risks at work.
C. Whether the local ambulance service can be used
D. The likely types of injury
QUESTION 6.24
In an on-site emergency, which of the following must a first-aider NOT do?
Right Answer: D
A. Treat an unconscious patient
First-aid is concerned with preserving life and
B. Control bleeding
limb, and first-aiders are not trained to dispense
C. Give resuscitation
medical treatments.
D. Give medicines to patients without authorisation
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 6.25
If someone has fallen over and has stopped breathing, what is the first thing you should do?
Right Answer: A
A. Send for help
Do not delay in sending for help; then try to start the
B. Attend to any broken bones
casualty breathing.
C. Try to give the casualty a drink
D. Try to start the casualty breathing
QUESTION 6.26
If someone has fallen off a ladder and they say their leg is broken, what should you do?
A. Send for the first-aider Right Answer: A
Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should
B. Help them to the cabin or mess hut
be summoned immediately.
C. Move the ladder so no-one trips over it
D. Bandage their legs together
QUESTION 6.27
Your workmate suddenly gets a foreign body in the eye. What should you do?
Right Answer: D
A. Take your workmate to the supervisor
Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should
B. Use a clean handkerchief to try and remove it
be summoned immediately.
C. Wash your hands before touching your mate’s face
D. Send someone for the first-aider
QUESTION 6.28
A person nearly collapses complaining of stomach pains. What should you do?
A. Send someone for the first-aider Right Answer: A
Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should
B. Go and find them something to drink
be summoned immediately.
C. Help them to find somewhere comfortable to sit
D. Ask them if they want something to eat
QUESTION 6.29
A workmate lifting a big box suddenly shouts ‘oh, my back’ and drops the box. What should you do?
Right Answer: B
A. Tell them to leave it for someone else to lift
The priority for any back injury is to obtain first-aid
B. Send for the first-aider
advice, in order to prevent further damage.
C. Help them to lift the box
D. Find them somewhere comfortable to sit and rest
QUESTION 6.30
What should you do immediately if you get a small cut on a finger whilst at work?
A. Carry on working Right Answer: B
It is important to obtain first-aid to prevent further harm
B. Get first-aid
(e.g. through infection). It should also be recorded in the
C. Ask your employer to report it to the HSE
accident book (Bl 510).
D. Just wash it clean
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 6.31
In an emergency situation at work you should do what?
Right Answer: B
A. Phone the HSE Inspectorate
A site emergency plan should have been drawn up and
B. Obey the site emergency procedure
you should be familiar with the emergency procedure.
C. Ensure your work mates are all accounted for
D. Leave the site immediately
QUESTION 6.32
What does the sound of a siren on-site normally indicate?
A. A fire Right Answer: D
B. A toxic escape
C. An explosion
D. An emergency
QUESTION 6.33
The purpose of fire-stopping in a building is to:
Right Answer: B
A. Prevent a fire starting
Fire-stopping is a passive fire protection measure used
Delay the passage of fire and smoke through openings
B.
to seal any openings created in a fire resistance-rated
in walls and floors
wall or floor assembly, e.g. to allow pipes or wiring
C. Activate fire sprinklers
systems to pass through. During fire conditions this
will impede the spread of fire and smoke.
D. Set off the fire alarm
QUESTION 6.34
What are fire-stops designed to do?
A. Extinguish a fire Right Answer: D
Protect services (such as wiring systems) against Fire-stops are designed to maintain the fireproofing of a
B.
wall or floor assembly. Fire-stopping delays the spread
fire damage
of fire and, generally, the spread of smoke as well.
C. Close fire doors automatically
Delay the passage of fire and smoke through openings
D.
in walls and floors
QUESTION 6.35
In addition to preserving fire separation between areas of a building, which other important fire safety function can
fire-stopping achieve?
Right Answer: A
A. Preventing premature structural collapse
During a fire it is essential that the load-bearing capacity
of elements of the building structure are maintained
B. Reducing nuisance fire alarms
until occupants have escaped. Timber studs, joists or
‘I’ beams, for example, may only have a short survival
C. Reducing noise transmission
time if exposed to fire and may rely on linings, such as a
plasterboard ceiling, for fire-resistance. Services passing
D. Saving energy
through such linings should therefore be fire-stopped.
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 6.36
lntumescent materials used to provide fire-stopping are designed to:
Right Answer: C
A. Expand when subjected to smoke
A limited number of fire-resistant materials may be used
B. Shrink when subjected to heat
to provide fire-stopping. These include intumescent
products, which are designed to expand and provide
C. Expand when subjected to heat
fire-stopping when subjected to heat. Examples
include intumescent ‘pillows’.
D. Prevent noise transmission
QUESTION 6.37
What should you do if you disturb fire-stopping around a wiring system penetrating a wall or floor whilst carrying out work?
Right Answer: B
A. Nail a piece of wood over any gaps
It is essential that the integrity of fire compartments is
maintained during the construction of buildings and on
Ensure that the fire-stopping is reinstated to the
B.
their completion. Compromising compartmentation,
necessary standard as soon as possible
such as failing to adequately fire-stop (seal) openings
for services to pass through, can undermine fire
C. Highlight this on any certification
precautions catastrophically. Only a limited range of
products are suitable and they must be correctly applied
D. Fill any holes or gaps with squashed newspaper
to provide the required degree of fire-stopping.
QUESTION 6.38
If you discover a hole or gap in a fire rated wall or floor that has not been fire-stopped, what should you do?
Right Answer: A
A. Report it to your supervisor without delay
Supervisors need to be made aware of any observed
B. Ignore it unless it is causing a draught inadequacies in fire-stopping - which can undermine fire
precautions catastrophically during the construction of
C. Cover the hole or gap with insulating tape buildings and on their completion. Only a limited range
of products are suitable and they must be correctly
applied to provide the required degree of fire-stopping.
D. Use decorators’ sealant to fill the gap
QUESTION 6.39
Which one of the following is associated with a Higher Risk Building (HRBs) in England?
Right Answer: A
A. At least 18 metres in height or seven storeys
At least 18 meters in height or seven storeys is the
B. At least 15 metres in height or seven storeys
height at which the Building Safety Regulator regime
C. At least 15 metres in height or six storeys
will apply in England.
D. At least 18 metres in height or six storeys
QUESTION 6.40
For a holistic approach to fire safety - to plan for all aspects of fire safety - the three main areas that need to be considered
are design, construction and...
A. Occupation Right Answer: C
Design, construction and maintenance are the main
B. Fire stopping
aspects to be considered as part of a holistic view to
C. Maintenance
fire safety covering all elements to cover all aspects.
D. Demolition
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 6.41
Which of the following materials provide the least effective fire resistance?
Right Answer: C
A. Brick
Timber or wood has a low ignition point and can be
B. Concrete
highly flammable, generally considered to have poor
C. Timber
fire resistance.
D. Steel
QUESTION 6.42
When man-made substances, such as rubber, burn, the colour of the smoke is typically:
Right Answer: B
A. White
The black colour of smoke from burning man-made
B. Black
substances, including rubber, is primarily due to
incomplete combustion of carbon-based materials,
C. Grey
and soot particles suspended in the air making the
smoke appear black.
D. Yellow
QUESTION 6.43
Which one of the following is a benefit of a ‘stay put’ strategy for fire evacuation in high risk buildings?
Right Answer: C
A. It slows the fire fighters’ response to a fire
A ‘stay-put’ strategy is designed to prevent injury,
It reduces communication between occupants
B.
and emergency services reduce panic, and reduce smoke inhalation which
could cause injury or fatalities.
You reduce the risk of entering a smoky corridor
C.
and being overcome by smoke
D. It allows lifts to be used more effectively
QUESTION 6.44
Which one of the following is not a requirement of a protected escape route?
A. Leads to a safe place Right Answer: C
Although emergency lighting systems are mandated
B. Protection from smoke
to provide adequate illumination in escape routes,
C. Infra-red lights
this does not include infra-red lights specifically.
D. Protection from fire
QUESTION 6.45
Which one of the following is not an area of competence?
Right Answer: B
A. Skills
Competence is broadly defined as the skills, knowledge,
B. Resilience
experience, and behaviours of an individual.
C. Knowledge
D. Behaviours
QUESTION 6.46
What is a key consideration for individuals to ensure safety at work?
A. Pushing personal limits to complete a job at any cost Right Answer: C
Competence includes the recognition and awareness
B. Having a go at jobs without proper training
of the limitations of your own competence, and not
Recognising the limitations of competence and not
C. undertaking jobs or tasks for which you haven’t received
exceeding your own limitations
proper training as this will lead to unsafe and potentially
Ignoring boundaries to complete a job in the quickest
dangerous practices.
D.
manner possible
42

===== PAGE 43 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 6.47
Which one of the following is a consequence of poor workmanship?
Right Answer: C
A. Improved fire safety
A lack of competence and poor workmanship can lead
B. A good reputation
to increased servicing and maintenance requirements,
C. Increase in hazard and servicing
and increased hazards as a result.
D. Increased structural stability
QUESTION 6.48
What is CROSS-UK?
A branch of the British Red Cross for Construction
Right Answer: C
A.
Workers
CROSS-UK is Collaborative Reporting for Safer
An online forum for workers to complain about their Structures UK – a confidential reporting system which
B.
employers allows professionals working in the built environment
to report on fire or structural safety issues.
A confidential reporting system to report on fire
C.
and structural safety issues
D. A charity that supplies work equipment to apprentices
43

===== PAGE 44 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
WORK AT HEIGHT
QUESTION 7.1
Most deaths on site are caused by:
Right Answer: B
A. Vehicle movements
Although the other dangers can kill or cause injury,
B. Falling from height
falling from height is the bigger cause of fatalities.
C. Solvent inhalation
D. Chemical burns
QUESTION 7.2
The type of accident that kills most construction site workers is:
A. Being hit by falling objects Right Answer: B
Although the other dangers can kill or cause injury,
B. Falling from heights
falling from height is the biggest cause of fatalities.
C. Trench collapses
D. Electrical accident
QUESTION 7.3
The main cause of deaths on construction sites is…
Right Answer: B
A. Fire
B. Falls from height
C. Being run over by plant
D. Excavation collapse
QUESTION 7.4
How many people should be working on a ladder at one time?
A. One on each section of an extension ladder Right Answer: B
Only one person should be working on a ladder,
B. One
although another person may be footing it, for
C. Two
extra stability.
D. Three if it is long enough
QUESTION 7.5
Ladders should be set at a slope of approximately:
Right Answer: D
A. 1 out for every 3 up
B. 4 out for every 1 up
C. 1 out for every 1 up
D. 1 out for every 4 up
QUESTION 7.6
Why should aluminium ladders be kept away from wet lime or cement?
A. It will stain your clothes Right Answer: C
Aluminium can corrode in certain situations, notably
B. The ladder may become statically charged
if in prolonged contact with lime or cement.
C. It may corrode the ladder
D. It will stain the aluminium
44

===== PAGE 45 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 7.7
Before being used, a ladder should be inspected:
Right Answer: B
A. By the foreman
The user needs to be satisfied that the ladder is in
B. By the user
a safe condition before using it.
C. By the manufacturer
D. By the Safety Officer
QUESTION 7.8
Ladders should be:
A. In good condition Right Answer: C
All the measures listed are required to reduce the
B. Tied or footed
risk of falls.
Tied or footed AND at the right angle AND in good
C.
condition
D. At the right angle
QUESTION 7.9
A ladder giving access to a scaffold can generally be safely used, provided that:
Right Answer: D
A. The foot of the ladder is firmly wedged
Access ladders should extend at least 1 metre above
B. It does not move when you climb up it
the landing point to provide a safe handhold.
C. Any broken rungs are clearly marked
D. It is tied and extends at least 1 metre above the platform
QUESTION 7.10
What is the ideal angle for a ladder against a wall and floor?
A. One metre up for every metre out from the wall Right Answer: D
The correct angle for a ladder is 75 degrees, which
B. One metre up for every two metres out from the wall
can be judged using the angle indicator marked on
C. Two metres up for every metre out from the wall
the stiles of some ladders or using the 1 in 4 rule.
D. Four metres up for every metre out from the wall
QUESTION 7.11
The rung of a wooden ladder has started to split, what should you do?
Right Answer: A
A. Do not use it, tell your supervisor
It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty
B. Cut the bad bit out
or damaged equipment.
C. Tape it up
D. Jump on it to see if it holds your weight
QUESTION 7.12
Ladders should not be painted because:
A. Regular repainting will be necessary Right Answer: D
B. The paint will make them slippery to use
The paint may not be suitable on metal parts
C.
of the ladder
The paint may cover a defect or damaged part
D.
of the ladder
45

===== PAGE 46 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 7.13
When can you work from a ladder?
Right Answer: A
A. For short periods and then only if it is safe to do so
Ladders are primarily means of access, not workplaces.
B. When it is long enough
They can be worked from, but only if the use of other,
C. When it is available
more suitable, work equipment is not appropriate and
the task is of low risk and of short duration.
D. When not being used for access
QUESTION 7.14
When working above public areas, what should be considered?
A. Preventing complaints from the public Right Answer: B
There is a significant risk to the public from falling
B. The danger of falling materials
materials, if this is not considered before and
C. Keeping the job going
during work.
D. Keeping the areas open to the public
QUESTION 7.15
A scaffold tower must be erected by:
Right Answer: A
A. A trained and competent person
There are a number of organizations that provide
B. The hire company who supply it
training for the safe erection and use of scaffold towers.
C. The site foreman
D. Senior site staff
QUESTION 7.16
What is the minimum height of the top guard-rail of a scaffold above the edge from which someone is liable to fall?
A. 470mm Right Answer: C
This is a requirement of the Work at Height
B. 910mm
Regulations 2005.
C. 950mm
D. 2 metres
QUESTION 7.17
A working platform used for construction work, and from which a person could fall 2 metres or more, must not be used
unless it has been inspected (and a report is subsequently prepared) by a competent person:
Right Answer: C
A. Only after an accident
Under these specific circumstances a report is required
to be prepared by the competent person and given to
B. That day
the person for whom the inspection was done (e.g. the
site manager). This is in addition to the more general
requirement to inspect equipment for work at height:
C. Within the previous seven days
prior to use in that position (or site if it is mobile);
following exceptional circumstances (e.g. high winds);
D. Within the previous month
and at suitable intervals.
46

===== PAGE 47 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 7.18
On a mobile elevating work platform, what should you attach your safety harness to?
Right Answer: A
A. A secure anchorage point inside the platform
The priority is to stay within the platform (which is the
B. A strong part of the structure you are working on
safest place) and in any event you cannot be sure of
C. The boom of the machine
the strength of other fixtures.
D. A nearby pipe or scaffold
QUESTION 7.19
You have been asked to operate a cherry-picker (mobile elevated work platform) when it is very windy. What should your
FIRST consideration be?
Right Answer: B
Wear a safety harness and clip it to the structure that
A.
you are working on
The priority in safety is eliminating risk at source – in this
case by not working in dangerous conditions – rather
B. Does the wind-speed make it unsafe to use the machine
than trying to stay safe by using protective equipment.
C. Wear an extra layer of clothing to keep warm
D. Tie all light-weight objects to the hand-rails of the basket
QUESTION 7.20
If you have to work at height and it is not possible to erect a scaffold, or use any other type of working platform or
mobile elevating work platform, then you should:
Work without fall protection, provided you have a mate Right Answer: B
A.
with you
The harness will greatly reduce the likelihood of injury
if you fall.
B. Wear a harness and lanyard at all times
Work without fall protection, provided the weather
C.
is not too windy
Work without fall protection at all times when no one
D.
else is about
QUESTION 7.21
When working on a roof that has fragile, clear-plastic panels, what is the best way of preventing falls through the panels?
Make sure that everyone is told where the panels are
Right Answer: B
A.
and to avoid treading on them
Protection from falling through openings and fragile
Cover the fragile panels with a strong material and
roof lights can be provided by barriers or with covers
B.
secure the covers to stop them being dislodged
which can be secured or labelled with a warning.
C. Remove the panels carefully to leave an open space.
It shouldn’ t be necessary to do anything, everyone
D.
knows the dangers
QUESTION 7.22
When working on a roof that has fragile, clear-plastic panels, what is the best way of preventing falls through the panels?
A. It is safe to walk on the purlins Right Answer: D
Fragile roofs must be made safe to work on, before
B. Walk straight across the roof to where you need to get to
work commences.
C. As long as you avoid any fragile areas it is safe
D. Crawling boards should always be used
47

===== PAGE 48 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 7.23
Half the deaths on construction sites are caused by which one of the following?
Right Answer: A
A. Falls from heights
This is shown by HSE statistics.
B. Electrical misuse
C. Working in trenches/confined spaces
D. Misuse of plant and machinery
QUESTION 7.24
What should you do if your work activity requires you to wear a full body safety harness and one is not available?
A. Make a harness from items found on site Right Answer: D
Always advise the supervisor if you do not have the
B. Carry on working and hope that everything will be alright
correct PPE.
C. Borrow a harness from a colleague
Stop work immediately and tell your supervisor that you
D.
do not have the correct PPE
QUESTION 7.25
Under what circumstances do the Work at Height Regulations permit a stepladder to be used on site?
A. Never – stepladders are banned Right Answer: D
The WAH Regulations have not banned the
B. At any time
use of ladders or stepladders, but they should
C. Provided you can’t fall 2 metres or more
be used sensibly.
Only when a risk assessment shows that safer
D. alternatives have been ruled out and the task is
of low risk and of short duration
QUESTION 7.26
What is the best method of securing a ladder?
A. Tying it to a suitable point Right Answer: A
Tying the ladder is the safest option, making sure
B. Using an effective ladder stability device
both stiles are tied.
C. Wedging the ladder (e.g. against a wall)
D. Having the ladder footed
QUESTION 7.27
Of the following, which is the POOREST method of securing a ladder?
Right Answer: C
A. Securing the base of the ladder
Footing a ladder is the last resort and should be
B. Tying the ladder
avoided. Other more suitable access equipment
C. Having someone foot the ladder
should be used where practicable.
D. Using a ladder stability device
QUESTION 7.28
Prior to moving a mobile tower scaffold, the platform height should reduced to a maximum of:
Right Answer: C
A. 2 metres
This figure is quoted in guidance published by the HSE
B. 3 metres
and PASMA. Checks should also be made that there are
no obstructions overhead, the ground is firm, level and
C. 4 metres
free from potholes, it is not too windy and there are no
people or materials on the tower.
D. 5 metres
48

===== PAGE 49 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
WORK EQUIPMENT
QUESTION 8.1
What do the letters SWL stand for?
Right Answer: D
A. Safe working level
Machinery and accessories for lifting loads should
B. Satisfactory weight limit
be clearly marked to indicate their safe working loads.
C. Satisfactory working limit
D. Safe working load
QUESTION 8.2
Who should operate plant and equipment on site?
A. Only people over 18 years of age Right Answer: B
Never operate plant or equipment unless you have
B. Trained and authorised employees only
been trained and are authorised to do so.
C. An employee holding a full driving licence
D. Any experienced employee
QUESTION 8.3
What hazard is created when the head of a cold chisel mushrooms?
Right Answer: C
A. Reduced striking area
This question is looking for the hazard, which
B. Softens the impact
is the situation that can cause harm to people.
C. Flying steel splinters
D. Damage to the hammer head
QUESTION 8.4
Any damaged equipment must be:
A. Reported to your supervisor Right Answer: A
It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty
B. Thrown away immediately
or damaged equipment.
C. Labelled as damaged before use
D. Locked up so no one can use it
QUESTION 8.5
The electric drill you are about to use has a faulty on/off switch. What action should you take?
Right Answer: C
A. Try and fix the fault
It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty
B. Find another machine and carry on working
or damaged equipment.
C. Remove it from use and tell your supervisor
D. Tape the switch on to keep it running and carry on working
QUESTION 8.6
The power hand tool you are about to use has burn marks visible on the cable. What should you do?
A. Tape over the affected area and continue Right Answer: B
It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty
Tell your supervisor about the defect and do not use
B.
or damaged equipment.
the tool
Obtain another machine and carry on, but don’t
C.
tell anyone
D. Carry on and get the job done
49

===== PAGE 50 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 8.7
Your supervisor asks you to use a powered hand-tool which has a rotating blade. You notice that the guard is missing
from the blade. What do you do?
Use the tool anyway, you haven’t had an accident
Right Answer: B
A.
with it before
It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty
B. Remove it from use and tell your supervisor
or damaged equipment.
C. Try to make an improvised guard yourself
D. Contact the manufacturer of the tool
QUESTION 8.8
Hand and power tools must be:
Right Answer: D
A. The best that you can buy
Tools must not create a risk to the user or others.
B. Made available when needed
This means they must be suitable and kept in good
C. In the company’s colours
condition. This requires inspection before use.
D. Suitable for the task and regularly inspected
QUESTION 8.9
When should visual checks of portable hand-held equipment be made by the user?
A. When a replacement is needed Right Answer: D
The user needs to be satisfied that the tool has no
B. Monthly
obvious defect before use.
C. Weekly
D. Each time it is used
QUESTION 8.10
What precaution should you take before adjusting an electrical tool?
Right Answer: C
A. Check the lead is not twisted or knotted
Do not adjust tools which could still be live or operate.
B. Wear safety footwear with steel toe caps
C. Disconnect from the power source
D. Wear the correct personal protective equipment
QUESTION 8.11
An electric drill is to be used. Before use, who should carry out a check on the tool?
A. Storeman Right Answer: D
The user needs to be satisfied that the tool has no
B. Electrician
obvious defect before use.
C. Foreman
D. User
QUESTION 8.12
What action should you take if an electric drill cuts out while you are using it?
Right Answer: D
A. Shake it about a bit
The drill may be faulty. If so, tell your supervisor and
B. Put it back into the tool box
remove the drill from service.
C. Switch the power off and on
D. Remove it from use and tell your supervisor
50

===== PAGE 51 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 8.13
If an electric drill gives off blue smoke from the motor, you should:
Right Answer: C
A. Pour water over it
2 
Defective electric hand tools must not be used.
B. Use a CO extinguisher
Stop what you are doing and inform your supervisor.
C. Switch it off and report it
D. Stop work for 30 minutes
QUESTION 8.14
How often should user (visual) checks be carried out on portable electrical equipment?
A. Every time you use it Right Answer: A
All items of portable electrical equipment should be
B. Every day
visually checked for safety by the user before being
C. Once a week
put into use.
D. At least once a year
QUESTION 8.15
What is the preferred nominal voltage for portable hand lamps for general use on construction sites?
Right Answer: A
A. 110 volts
110 volt reduced low voltage systems are strongly
B. 150 volts
preferred for the supply to such equipment.
C. 230 volts
D. 400 volts
QUESTION 8.16
What is the preferred nominal voltage for portable hand tools on construction sites?
A. 12 volts Right Answer: C
110 volt reduced low voltage systems are strongly
B. 24 volts
preferred for the supply to such equipment.
C. 110 volts
D. 230 volts
QUESTION 8.17
What is the preferred nominal voltage for local lighting up to 2 kW on construction sites?
A. 55 volts Right Answer: B
110 volt reduced low voltage systems are strongly
B. 110 volts
preferred for the supply to such equipment.
C. 400 volts
D. 230 volts
QUESTION 8.18
What is the recommended maximum voltage for portable hand lamps when working in confined or damp locations?
Right Answer: A
A. 50 volts
Where the environment is damp, or restricting and
conductive, the magnitude of any electric shock will
B. 110 volts
be higher than under normal conditions. Hand lamps
in such locations should therefore be supplied from a
C. 230 volts
SELV (separated extra-low voltage) system, i.e. having
a maximum voltage of 50 volts and which is electrically
D. 400 volts
separated from earth.
51

===== PAGE 52 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 8.19
If you only have a mains voltage (230 V) hand drill and you want to use it on a construction site which only has yellow
(110 V) socket-outlets, what should you do?
A. Use a transformer to boost the voltage Right Answer: C
Electrical equipment must not be modified or operated
B. Cut the plug off and fit a yellow one instead
at voltages other than their design voltage.
C. Obtain a 110 V drill or a cordless one for the work
Make up an extension cable with a yellow plug on
D.
one end and a standard socket on the other end
QUESTION 8.20
What is most commonly used to reduce 230 volts to 110 volts on site?
A. Residual current device Right Answer: B
A transformer, usually coloured yellow, will transform
B. Transformer
230 volts (mains voltage) down to a relatively safe
C. Circuit breaker
110 volts.
D. Step-down generator
QUESTION 8.21
When using an extension cable reel, which of the following statements is correct?
Right Answer: C
A. Leave as much as possible coiled up on the reel
The rating of a partially unreeled extension cable is
B. Uncoil it fully every time
much lower than when fully unreeled. Overheating of
Do not exceed the reeled or unreeled rating
the cable will occur if the rating is exceeded. Care
C.
as appropriate
should also be taken to prevent extension cables
D. Only uncoil what you need becoming a tripping hazard.
QUESTION 8.22
If an extension cable is to be run across a site road, what action should you take?
A. Throw wooden boards over it Right Answer: B
It is essential that the cable is protected from damage
Place a rubber protection ramp over it and put up a
B.
caused by passing traffic. A sign will warn road traffic
sign stating ’Ramp Ahead’
of the ramp.
C. Don’ t do anything to protect the cable
D. Lay the cable over wooden boards
QUESTION 8.23
To operate a powered hand tool you must be:
A. 16 years old or over Right Answer: D
There are no general age restrictions in legislation
B. 18 years old or over
relating to the use of work equipment. Any person using
C. 21 years old or over
work equipment. however, must be competent to do so,
which will require initial and refresher training.
D. Trained and competent
QUESTION 8.24
If you are about to use a power tool and discover the guard is missing, you should:
A. Make up a temporary guard yourself Right Answer: C
Visual checks should be carried out before
B. Use the tool but try to work quickly
using equipment. Any faults should be reported
C. Not use the tool until a proper guard has been fitted
immediately and rectified before use.
D. Use the tool but work carefully and slowly
52

===== PAGE 53 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
SPECIAL SITE HAZARDS
QUESTION 9.1
Why may a confined space be dangerous to work in?
Right Answer: D
A. There may not be sufficient working space
There can be a range of hazards associated with
B. Air in the space may be unbreathable due to poisonous gas
confined spaces, and these can include all of those
C. Temperature and poor ventilation may affect the worker
mentioned.
D. All of the hazards mentioned
QUESTION 9.2
What must be considered first when planning to carry out work in a confined space?
A. Has the job been priced properly Right Answer: D
Working outside will remove the risks of working
B. Have the correct tools been arranged
in the confined space.
C. Has sufficient manpower been allocated
D. Can the work be done from the outside
QUESTION 9.3
When working in a confined space, such as a sewer, what danger may occur?
Right Answer: D
A. Getting wet through
Sewer gases can be inflammable and suffocating.
B. Boredom
C. Not enough time for the job to be done
D. Build-up of harmful gases
QUESTION 9.4
To determine the safety of the atmosphere in an excavation, which of the following is essential.
A. Sniffing the atmosphere after entry Right Answer: B
Use a suitable detector. Many dangerous gases have
B. Using a gas detector
no smell and cannot be seen. Workers can be overcome
C. Only entering for a short period to enable a quick escape
in seconds in dangerous atmospheres.
D. Looking for toxic gases
QUESTION 9.5
Before entering an excavation to start work, it must first be:
Right Answer: A
A. Inspected by a competent person
Excavation work is hazardous. A competent person,
B. Covered over and left overnight
knowledgeable about how to reduce risks, notably from
C. Filled with water then drained
collapse of the walls, must inspect the excavation first.
D. Inspected by the HSE
QUESTION 9.6
What is the purpose of using a ‘permit to work’ system?
A. To ensure the job is carried out by the quickest method Right Answer: B
A permit to work is a written system used to control
B. To help ensure a safe system of work
certain types of hazardous work. They allow work to
C. To ensure that the client will pay for the work
start only when site procedures have been clarified.
To enable tools and equipment to be properly checked
D.
before the commencement of work
53

===== PAGE 54 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 9.7
Why may young people be more at risk on site?
Right Answer: D
A. There is no specific legislation applying to them
Health and Safety guidance lists young people as often
B. They are usually left to work alone to gain experience
being ‘at particular risk’, due to their lack of practical
C. There is no requirement to provide PPE to young people
experience.
D. They are inexperienced and may not recognise danger
QUESTION 9.8
You have to enter a manhole in which you know there are toxic gases. You have all the PPE but there does not appear
to be a rescue plan in place. What should you do?
Right Answer: C
A. Just get on and do the job, it will probably be alright
A rescue plan must be in place before anyone enters a
B. Plan to carry out the job in short bursts
confined space. This is one of the requirements of the
Do not enter the manhole until a rescue plan and rescue
Confined Spaces Regulations 1997.
C.
equipment are in place
Ask your mate to stand-by at the top of the manhole
D.
with a length of rope
QUESTION 9.9
You have to enter a manhole in which you believe there could be toxic gases. You have not been provided with any
Respiratory Protective Equipment (RPE). What should you do?
Tell your supervisor that you will need RPE, and if
Right Answer: A
A.
necessary, training in confined space working
An employer must provide all necessary personal
Sniff the atmosphere in the manhole to see if you
protective equipment and respiratory protective
B.
can smell harmful gases
equipment when an employee is required to enter
a confined space. This is one of the requirements
Look into the manhole to see if you can see any
C.
of the Confined Spaces Regulations 1997.
harmful gases
D. Just get on with the job, and accept the risks
QUESTION 9.10
While digging a trench, you uncover a length of yellow marker tape at a depth of about 150mm. What does the presence
of the marker tape mean?
The area has a high water-table and precautions must be
Right Answer: B
A.
taken to prevent an in-rush of water
The coloured tape indicates that there are buried
There is a buried electrical cable and further excavation
services below the route of the tape.
B.
must be carried out with care
There is contaminated soil below the level of the marker
C.
tape and all excavation must stop
The excavation has reached a depth where the sides
D.
must now be supported
QUESTION 9.11
A Cable Avoidance Tool (C.A.T.) and a ‘Genny’ (generator) can be used successfully to locate underground cables by whom:
A. Anyone Right Answer: B
Equipment used to locate buried services must only
B. A competent person after training
be used by people who have been trained to use it.
C. Any electricity company employee
D. The site foreman
54

===== PAGE 55 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 9.12
When exposing underground power cables, which method of excavation should you use?
Right Answer: C
A. A 360 degree excavator with rubber tyres
Hand-held power tools and mechanical excavators
B. A pickaxe
should not be used too close to underground services
C. Hand digging
and hand digging should be carried out with care.
D. A kango hammer
QUESTION 9.13
When do special precautions need to be taken when working near overhead electric power lines?
A. Only if cranes etc. are being used Right Answer: D
Actual contact with a power line is not necessary to
B. Only if someone could touch a line with their bare hands
result in an electric shock as a close approach may allow
C. Only if plant has to pass under the lines
‘flashover’ to occur. HSE publication GS6 gives advice
on procedures to avoid such danger.
D. Whenever work areas will be near or beneath the lines
QUESTION 9.14
When working alone:
Right Answer: A
A. Make sure someone responsible knows where you are
Employees should adhere to safe working arrangements
B. You can do away with protective equipment
put in place by their employer. When working alone, such
Don’t bother anyone if you have a problem, always sort
arrangements should include informing a responsible
C.
it out yourself
person of your location periodically.
D. Wear headphones, it will make the day go more quickly
QUESTION 9.15
You have to walk across a site several times a day, but have to dodge a lot of site traffic. The first thing you should do is:
A. Have word with the drivers Right Answer: C
Pedestrian routes should have been set up to keep
B. Walk around the edges of the site to keep out of the way
people and vehicles apart, so inform your employer if
C. Tell your supervisor about the danger
the system is not working. Don’t hitch rides on vehicles
Jump on the back of a vehicle if you can, it’s safer unless safe seating is provided.
D.
than walking
QUESTION 9.16
A mobile plant operator can let you ride in the machine:
A. If you have a long way to go Right Answer: C
Don’t hitch rides on vehicles unless safe seating
B. If it is raining
is provided.
C. If it is designed to carry passengers
D. At any time
55

===== PAGE 56 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
ELECTROTECHNICAL
QUESTION 10.1
In accordance with the Electricity at Work regulations, when considering whether to work live a responsible person should:
A. Carry out a risk assessment Right Answer: A
To identify and assess the risks involved and the
B. Only work dead
methods of controlling them.
C. Only work live
D. Do as the client demands
QUESTION 10.2
The normal procedure for working on electrical equipment should be which one of the following?
Right Answer: A
A. Dead working
Dead working should be considered as the norm
B. Wearing insulated gloves
and work on or near live conductors should rarely
C. Using insulated tools
be permitted.
D. Live working
QUESTION 10.3
Test instruments used for working on electrical systems should:
A. Be yellow in colour Right Answer: D
To protect the user from electric shock whilst using
B. Be less than 10 years old
the instrument. i.e. handling the probes.
C. Have non-insulated test probes
D. Have insulated test probes
QUESTION 10.4
Under the Electricity at Work Regulations, live working is considered:
Right Answer: C
A. As entirely acceptable
Extra controls must be employed, including training,
B. To be normally permitted
supervision and use of suitable tools and protective
C. Only to be allowed in exceptional circumstances
equipment.
D. Never to be allowed
QUESTION 10.5
Which of the following would you use to replace the fuse in a plug if fuses were NOT available?
A. A nail Right Answer: D
A fuse is often the main safety device in an electrical
B. A piece of silver paper
circuit. A blown fuse must only be replaced by a fuse
C. A bit of wire
of the correct type and rating.
D. None of the options listed
QUESTION 10.6
To prove a circuit or equipment is dead after isolation what is the FIRST activity in the sequence of events?
A. Make sure equipment is not working Right Answer: C
This will prove that that the voltage detector (such as
B. Check between line and earth
a two-pole voltage detector or proprietary test lamp)
Check that the voltage detector is working on a proving
is working, i.e. indicating voltage.
C.
device, known live source or in built test feature
D. Check between line and neutral
56

===== PAGE 57 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 10.7
The nominal single phase voltage in the UK is?
Right Answer: A
A. 230 volts
This is the nominal voltage for public electricity supply
B. 240 volts
systems within Europe.
C. 415 volts
D. 400 volts
QUESTION 10.8
When is live working permissible?
When the person carrying out the work is a
Right Answer: B
A.
competent person
This is a requirement under r.14 of the EAW Regulations.
When it is unreasonable in all circumstances for the However, it does not mean that live working is then ’safe’.
B. equipment to be made dead and suitable precautions
are taken
C. When the means of isolation cannot be identified
When the person working on the equipment is wearing
D.
rubber gloves
QUESTION 10.9
Which of the following is NOT a requirement of low voltage safe isolation practice?
Right Answer: B
A. Ensuring that the correct point of isolation is identified
Safe isolation practice refers to dead working. The use
The person carrying out the work is issued with
B.
of insulating gloves will generally only be applicable to
insulating gloves
live working.
A caution notice should be applied at the point
C.
of isolation
D. The conductors are proved to be dead at the point of work
QUESTION 10.10
The specific effects on the human body of a major electric shock are one of the following:
Right Answer: B
A. Dermatitis
B. Burns and cardiac arrest
C. Broken bones
D. Chest pains
QUESTION 10.11
The lowest level of electrical current which can harm the human body is normally measured in:
Right Answer: D
A. Microamps
Research has shown that a person is in serious
B. Kiloamps
danger of a fatal electric shock at. or above,
C. Amps
approximately 30 milliamps.
D. Milliamps
57

===== PAGE 58 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 10.12
With regard to the effect of electrical current on the human body, one of the following is correct:
A 6 amp circuit breaker should prevent a person Right Answer: C
A.
receiving a fatal electric shock
An RCD is a mechanical switching device intended to
cause the opening of the contacts when the residual
A 3 amp fuse should prevent a person receiving a fatal
B.
current attains a given value under specified conditions.
electric shock
A 30 mA Residual Current Device (RCD) should prevent
C.
a person receiving a fatal electric shock
A 5 amp rewireable fuse should prevent a person
D.
receiving a fatal electric shock
QUESTION 10.13
Where mains voltage is used to supply portable equipment on a construction site, what additional protection is required?
Right Answer: D
A. Step-down transformer
Reduced low voltage systems (e.g. 110 volt centre point
B. Step-down generator
earthed) are strongly preferred in such circumstances.
Where only mains voltage (230 V) equipment is
C. Cable avoidance tool
available, however, a 30 mA RCD will give additional
protection against fatal electric shock.
D. Residual current device (RCD)
QUESTION 10.14
What colour cable USUALLY signifies 110 volt power supply on site?
A. Black Right Answer: D
Yellow is the usual colour of cables, socket outlets,
B. Red
plugs and transformers etc which are used with a
C. Blue
110 volt supply.
D. Yellow
QUESTION 10.15
A portable electric generator on site has two power outlets, 110 volts and 230 volts. What colour would the 110 volt
outlet be?
A. Black Right Answer: B
Yellow is the usual colour of cables, socket outlets,
B. Yellow
plugs and transformers etc which are used with a
C. Red
110 volt supply.
D. Blue
QUESTION 10.16
Where there is no local means of isolation for equipment or circuits to be worked on, which of the following is the
preferred method of isolation?
A. Use a suitable device such as a circuit breaker Right Answer: A
Isolating the whole installation or distribution board
B. Isolation of the individual circuit breaker or fuse
is the safest method.
C. Pulling out the distributor’s cut-out fuse
D. Disconnecting the individual circuit from the DB
58

===== PAGE 59 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 10.17
What action should you take if a workmate gets an electric shock?
Right Answer: C
A. Phone the electricity board immediately
If you can switch the power off, the electric hazard will
B. Dial 999 and ask for the fire brigade
be removed. First aid assistance will then probably be
required. Do not touch someone who is still in contact
C. Cut off the power and call for help
with live electrical cables as you could also receive an
electric shock.
D. Try to pull them to safety
QUESTION 10.18
A residual current device is designed to operate in the event of one of the following:
Right Answer: B
A. Overload
An RCD provides additional protection against the risk
B. Earth fault
of electric shock.
C. Lightning strike on the supply
D. Short-circuit
QUESTION 10.19
Electrical installations on construction sites should be periodically inspected and tested:
A. Every 3 months Right Answer: A
Three monthly inspections of construction site
B. Every year
installations are recommended in IET Guidance Note 3.
C. Every 6 months
D. Every month
QUESTION 10.20
The maximum AC voltage which the human body can withstand without long term physiological effects in dry conditions is:
Right Answer: C
A. 110 volts
Regarded as a non-fatal voltage level.
B. 230 volts
C. 50 volts
D. 400 volts
QUESTION 10.21
Which of the following statements is true with regard to the dangers of electricity?
Electricity is perfectly safe so long as you wear
Right Answer: D
A.
cotton gloves
The features which make electricity so dangerous are
Electricity is only dangerous if you are not wearing
that you cannot see, hear or smell it. It can give you a
B.
wellington boots
very unpleasant surprise. Always assume that cables
are live.
C. Electricity is only dangerous in wet weather
Electricity is dangerous at any time because you cannot
D.
tell by looking at a cable whether or not it is live
59

===== PAGE 60 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 10.22
What is the most serious effect that electric shock can have if you come into contact with a live part?
The electric current can cause a slight tingling in the
Right Answer: C
A.
fingers
Contact with live electrical parts can be fatal. If you
B. The electric current can cause burn marks on the fingers
do not know otherwise, always assume that electrical
parts are live.
The electric current can cause the heart to stop,
C.
resulting in death
The electric current can cause the finger muscles
D.
to twitch
QUESTION 10.23
Your job involves you working near to hanging electrical cables which have bare ends. What should you do?
Right Answer: C
A. Touch the cables to see if they are live
You must always assume that exposed cables are live
B. Carry on working, as there shouldn’t be a problem
until you know they are not. Contact with live electrical
C. Inform your supervisor and keep well away
cables can kill.
Attempt to push the cables back into the ceiling void
D.
so that you can start work
QUESTION 10.24
For all live working activities it is necessary to:
Carry out a risk assessment as required by the EAW
Right Answer: A
A.
Regulations.
B. Wear rubber gloves only
C. Be accompanied
D. Keep your fingers crossed
QUESTION 10.25
An electrical Permit to Work is primarily a statement that:
Right Answer: D
A. Someone else has taken responsibility for the work
Permits to work describe the procedures that prevent a
B. The circuit or equipment is live
major hazard, such as electricity or moving machinery,
C. Certain instructions need to be followed
from causing harm, usually by isolation to effectively
ensure (in the case of electricity) ’dead’ working with
The circuit or equipment has been isolated and is safe
D.
no chance of it going ‘live’ .
to work on
QUESTION 10.26
The probes of voltage detectors and test instruments used on electrical systems should be:
A. Manufactured in the UK Right Answer: C
In addition, to protect against damage by overcurrent
B. Accompanied by a calibration certificate
whilst in use, the probes or instrument should
Shaped or have barriers to prevent finger contact
incorporate suitable high breaking capacity (hbc) fuses
C.
with the tips
with a low current rating (usually not exceeding 500 mA).
or current-limiting resistors.
D. Coloured red
60

===== PAGE 61 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 10.27
Which of the following does the Electricity at Work (EAW) regulations apply to?
Right Answer: A
A. All persons engaged for work purposes
The EAW Regulations impose duties on employers,
B. Self employed persons only
employees and the self employed.
C. Employees only
D. Employers only
QUESTION 10.28
The Electricity at Work Regulations require that:
Persons working with electricity must have the
Right Answer: A
A.
appropriate level of knowledge and experience
Competency is a requirement of r.16 of the
A training course is necessary before anyone can
EAW Regulations.
B.
work with electricity
C. Only electricians can work with electricity
D. Anyone supervised can work with electricity
QUESTION 10.29
The Electricity at Work Regulations apply to:
A. Only low voltage systems Right Answer: C
The EAW Regulations cover the safe use of electricity
B. Only extra-low voltage systems
in work activities, irrespective of voltage.
C. All voltage systems
D. Only high voltage systems
QUESTION 10.30
Which of the following should be used to prove a circuit or equipment is dead after isolation?
Right Answer: B
A. A lamp holder with a length of flex attached
Accident history has shown that using incorrectly set
B. A proprietary test lamp or two-pole voltage detector
multimeters or makeshift devices for voltage detection
has often caused accidents. The use of non-contact
C. A voltage stick
voltage indicators (voltage sticks) is also not advised
as the sole means of proving dead.
D. A multimeter
QUESTION 10.31
Which of the following is NOT a suitable means of isolating a circuit?
Right Answer: B
A. Removing a fuse and locking the distribution board
The isolating device should be switched off or the
B. Putting insulating tape over the circuit breaker
fuse removed. The switch, circuit breaker or enclosure
should then be locked and the key removed. A notice
C. Padlocking the isolating switch
or label should also be posted to warn that someone
is working on the circuit or apparatus.
D. Fitting a padlocked circuit breaker lockout
61

===== PAGE 62 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 10.32
Which of the following work procedures on electrical systems will always require a permit-to-work to be issued?
Right Answer: C
A. Dead working on low-voltage systems
An electrical permit-to-work should state what circuit
or equipment has been made safe, how that has been
B. Live working on low-voltage systems
achieved and what work is to be done. A permit should
not, therefore, be used for live working. Such a permit is
C. Dead working on high-voltage systems
always required for work on high-voltage systems, but
can also be used for low-voltage systems.
D. Live working on high-voltage systems
QUESTION 10.33
Optical fibre cable remnants should not be left lying around on site because:
A. They can be hot and burn upon contact Right Answer: C
Fibre fragments can enter the bloodstream and cause
B. Laser beams still exist in the cut pieces
infections in the skin or eyes. All fibre waste, particularly
C. They can pierce the skin or eyes
small pieces, should be placed in suitable receptacles.
D. They are toxic
QUESTION 10.34
Why should the end of an optical fibre cable never be pointed towards your own or anyone else’s eyes?
A. The beam can transfer a strong electric current Right Answer: D
Exposure to light sources such as lasers or highly
B. The colour of the beam is very hypnotic
concentrated visible or infrared light beams, associated
C. The beam can bore a hole through the skin
with the testing or use of optical fibres, can cause
damage to the eyes, or even blindness.
D. The beam can damage the eyes
QUESTION 10.35
The use of a multi-lock hasp with the appropriate number of padlocks is a recommended method of safe isolation where:
Right Answer: C
Individual circuit breaker locking off devices are
A.
not available
A multi-lock hasp can be used to prevent operation
of the isolator until such time that all persons working
Individual circuit breakers are not identified at the
B.
on the electrical installation have completed their work
distribution board
and removed their padlocks from the hasp.
More than one person will be working on circuits
C.
supplied from the same distribution board
D. You know the health and safety inspector is in the area
QUESTION 10.36
Which of the following procedures should be used when more than one person will be working on circuits supplied from
a distribution board which has been switched off?
The use of a multi-lock hasp on the isolator with a
Right Answer: A
A.
padlock for each operative
A multi-lock hasp can be used to prevent operation
B. Blowing a horn before the power is switched on again of the isolator until such time that all persons working
on the electrical installation have completed their work
C. Giving each operative a volt stick
and removed their padlocks from the hasp.
Telling everyone what time the power will be switched
D.
on again
62

===== PAGE 63 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
ENVIRONMENTAL
QUESTION 11.1
You are on site and you need to dispose of some waste liquid which has oil in it and you are not sure what to do with it.
What should you do?
Right Answer: D
A. Dispose of it in a sealed container into the site skip
Dealing with hazardous/special waste will include proper
storage and segregation before it is taken away by an
B. Pour it onto the ground, it will soak away
authorised waste carrier as required by environmental
legislation. An oil spillage could also get into the
ground or drains, which may also be an offence under
C. Take it outside and set light to it
environmental law. Burning waste on site is also an
offence, under air pollution legislation, and can lead to
Ask your supervisor about the correct way to deal with
D.
local complaints.
this waste.
QUESTION 11.2
How should you get rid of hazardous/special waste?
Right Answer: B
A. Put it at the bottom of any site skip
The Hazardous Waste Regulations (Special Waste
B. In accordance with the correct site waste rules
Regulations in Scotland) require hazardous/special
waste to be properly segregated or otherwise treated,
C. Take it home, they wont want it on site
and then recovered or disposed of in an officially
D. Take it to the nearest local authority waste tip
approved way.
QUESTION 11.3
Which of the following is classed as hazardous/special waste?
A. Non-asbestos Insulation Right Answer: D
Hazardous wastes (special wastes in Scotland) are
B. Polythene and shrink wrap
specified in waste legislation. Fluorescent tubes are
C. Empty cement bags
included because of their mercury content.
D. Fluorescent light tubes
QUESTION 11.4
Which of the following should be disposed of as hazardous/special waste?
Right Answer: C
A. Timber, plywood and MDF off-cuts
Hazardous wastes (special wastes in Scotland) are
B. Glass fibre insulation
specified in waste legislation. Aerosol sealants are
included because they can explode if not recovered
C. Aerosol sealant canisters
or disposed of properly, and they may still contain
D. Used nuisance dust masks
hazardous solvents.
QUESTION 11.5
You need to clean up some oil that has leaked from machinery onto the ground. What is the right way to do this?
Right Answer: B
A. Put the oily contaminated soil into the general waste skip
Oil-contaminated wastes are classified as hazardous/
Put the oily contaminated soil into a suitable container
special waste in waste legislation. The Hazardous Waste
B.
that takes hazardous waste
Regulations (Special Waste Regulations in Scotland)
require such waste to be properly segregated or
C. Put it under some off-cuts so that the oil cannot be seen
otherwise treated, and then recovered or disposed of
in an approved way. Following the other options would
D. Wash the oil away with water and detergent
be an offence under waste legislation.
63

===== PAGE 64 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 11.6
Other site workers are complaining that you are generating too much dust. What should you do?
Right Answer: B
A. Tell them you have nearly finished
Excessive dust may be a health hazard to you and
those around you, but even if it is not a health hazard,
B. Stop work and inform your supervisor
excessive dust can be a ‘statutory nuisance (under
the Environmental Protection Act). Even when it is
C. Ignore them – it’s none of their business
not a statutory nuisance, it can lead to complaints
from neighbours and possible damage to
D. Issue the other site workers with dust masks
neighbouring property.
QUESTION 11.7
Who needs to understand relevant environmental risks on a construction site?
Right Answer: C
A. Only the principal contractor
The actions of everyone on site determine how well
B. Only the subcontractors
the risks to the environment (such as water pollution,
C. Everyone working on the site
or creating a local nuisance) are controlled.
D. Only the environmental clerk of works
QUESTION 11.8
Under environmental law, which statement is true?
Companies and individuals can be prosecuted if they
Right Answer: A
A.
do not follow the law
Most environmental law is enforced against companies,
B. Companies can be prosecuted, but not individuals but the regulator in the relevant part of the UK
(the Environment Agency, SEPA or NIEA) can also
It is legal to transport business waste without proper
C.
prosecute company officers and even have powers
paperwork
to prosecute employees if they wilfully contribute
D. It is legal to disturb protected species’ habitats to environmental harm.
QUESTION 11.9
Do individuals have any responsibility for sustainability when on site?
Right Answer: D
A. No, it is dealt with by the site manager
Your responsibility is to follow the site and company
B. No, it is a matter for the Environment Agency/NIEA/SEPA
rules aimed at environmental protection and
sustainability, and to help your company to comply
C. Only on sites where there is asbestos
with relevant legal requirements, such as the
need to segregate waste properly (e.g. so that
D. Yes, on every site
it can be recovered).
QUESTION 11.10
Which of the following is NOT best practice from a sustainability point of view?
Right Answer: D
A. Saving materials, fuel, water and energy
Option D would be wasting a valuable natural resource
B. Looking after the people working on or near the site
(copper) that could be effectively recovered for later
use or recycling. Reusing or recycling copper has less
C. Protecting the environment
environmental impact than mining and extracting new
D. Sending unused and waste copper cables to landfill
copper reserves.
64

===== PAGE 65 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 11.11
Which of the following does NOT help sustainability during construction projects?
Leaving engines and motors running when they are
Right Answer: A
A.
not needed
Option A generates local air pollution and carbon
B. Segregating waste dioxide emissions (which contribute to global warming),
and also increases the noise nuisance.
C. Vehicle sharing or using public transport to get to work
D. Avoiding overheating site huts
QUESTION 11.12
Which of the following should you do on site in the interest of sustainability?
A. Run plant and equipment when they are not needed Right Answer: C
Your actions will help your company, and others working
B. Bury waste material
on site, to achieve more sustainable work practices,
C. Comply with site instructions on handling waste materials
such as waste recovery.
D. Pour waste liquids down a drain off-site
QUESTION 11.13
Which of the following is NOT part of ‘environmentally-friendly’ construction?
Right Answer: A
Creating a dust nuisance to residents in neighbouring
A.
properties
Neighbours outside the site are an important part of the
wider environment. They may be affected by nuisance
B. Preventing water and soil pollution
(such as noise, dust or even light at night), and they
may complain to the client, main contractor or the local
C. Saving energy
enforcing authority. Creating certain types of nuisance
is an offence under the Environmental Protection Act.
D. Minimising the amount of waste you create during a job
QUESTION 11.14
From an environmental point of view, why should materials be reused, where possible?
Right Answer: B
A. To save the client money
Although reducing the amount of waste is the first
A lot of energy and raw materials go into making most
B.
construction products priority, the re-use of materials can also contribute
to effective waste management.
C. It makes less mess on site
D. Its’ a European Union Law
QUESTION 11.15
Which action will help to minimise waste?
Only take or open what you need and return or reseal Right Answer: A
A.
anything left over
The hierarchy for managing waste is to reduce/reuse/
recover. Reducing the amount of waste is therefore
B. Use new materials/packs at the beginning of each day
the first priority.
C. Leave materials unprotected in the rain
Always order much more than usually required – just in
D.
case you need it
65

===== PAGE 66 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 11.16
Which of the following is good environmental practice?
Right Answer: B
A. Over-ordering materials
This is good practice, since it will help with waste
B. Segregating waste into different types
recovery. If the waste is classified as hazardous waste
C. Leaving skips uncovered in wet weather
(special waste in Scotland) proper segregation is also
a legal requirement.
D. Leaving motors running when they are not needed
QUESTION 11.17
Do individuals have any responsibility for minimising the amount of waste created on site?
A. Only if asbestos removal is being carried out Right Answer: B
Your actions will help your company, and others on site, to
B. Yes, everyone on site has this responsibility
procure sensibly and to organise the job so that materials
C. No, it’s the responsibility of the client
and substances are not wasted. Waste reduction is the
best option when trying to manage site waste.
D. Only during site clean-up, at the end of the project
QUESTION 11.18
If you have unused material left, what should you do before you consider putting non-hazardous waste items into a skip?
Right Answer: C
A. Make sure there is a label on it
Although reducing the amount of waste is the first
B. Put it in a plastic bag and put it in a skip
priority, the reuse of waste materials is much better
Check whether someone else on your team can make
than disposal, which is the most expensive option and
C.
use of it
which should be the last resort. Reuse is a better waste
D. Weigh it management option than recovery.
QUESTION 11.19
Why should different types of waste be separated on site?
Right Answer: D
A. It will take up less room in the skip
This is good practice, since waste recovery can save both
B. So the local council can charge Landfill Tax
energy and materials, compared to creating brand new
materials or items. It will also cut the amount of waste
So the main contractor can check what’s being
C.
that goes to landfill. If the waste is classed as hazardous
thrown away
(special waste in Scotland) then the effective separation
D. So waste can be recovered more easily of different wastes is a legal requirement.
QUESTION 11.20
When storing liquids (such as oils, fuels or chemicals) on-site, what must you do?
Right Answer: C
A. Always use the nearest container
Any spillage could get into the ground or drains, which is
Use a transparent container so you can check how
B.
much liquid is in it likely to be an offence under environmental legislation.
Ensure the liquid material is stored safely and securely,
C.
and out of the way of site traffic
D. Keep the tops off, to prevent pressure from building up
66

===== PAGE 67 =====
HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
QUESTION 11.21
What can help to prevent harm to the environment from oil spillages?
Right Answer: D
A. A supply of water to flush the spill away
The use of a bund (fully walled storage area) or a drip tray
B. Cover the spillage with soil
will help any spillage to be contained in a small area for
Turning liquid containers upside down so the top
C. clear up. Any spillage could get into the ground or drains,
can’t come off
which is likely to be an offence under environmental
Store oils in an area that can catch any spills, such
legislation.
D.
as a bund or a drip tray.
67

===== PAGE 68 =====
and by
is administered by the
in Scotland
Tel: 0131 445 9216
in England, Wales & Northern Ireland
Email: ecs@sjib.org.uk
ecscard.org.uk sjib.org.uk
