
===== PAGE 1 =====
1  HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  ecscard.org.uk |   For ECS Health, Safety and Environmental Assessments from 6 May 2024  Revision Guide

===== PAGE 2 =====
2  HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  Administered in England, Wales and Northern Ireland by the Joint Industry Board for the Electrotechnical Industry Administered in Scotland by the Scottish Joint Industry Board for the Electrical Contracting Industry  ©   Electrotechnical Certification Scheme  HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  Revision Guide  For assessments from 6 May 2024 Introduction   3  General Health and Safety at Work   7  Manual Handling Operations   14  Reporting Accidents   19  Personal Protective Equipment at Work   25  Health and Hygiene   30  Fire and Emergency   35  Work at Height   44  Work Equipment   49  Special Site Hazards   53  Electrotechnical   56  Environmental   63

===== PAGE 3 =====
3 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  INTRODUCTION  The information in this guide is for ECS Health, Safety and Environmental Awareness Assessments taken from 6 May 2024.  The electrotechnical industry is constantly striving to improve the Health and Safety awareness of everyone working in the industry. The Electrotechnical Certification Scheme (ECS) Health, Safety and Environmental Awareness Assessment was originally introduced in 2002 in compliance of the Electrotechnical Certification Scheme’s affiliation to the Construction Skills Certification Scheme (CSCS) that requires anyone obtaining or renewing an ECS Card to demonstrate an acceptable standard of health and safety knowledge.  THE ASSESSMENT  The ECS Health. Safety and Environmental Awareness Assessment is made up of 50 multiple choice questions drawn randomly from the question bank to be completed in 30 minutes. Each question will require one correct answer to be picked from a choice of four. The assessment will be made up from questions covering eleven topics. The numbers of questions that will be used from each topic are: General Health and Safety at Work   6 Manual Handling Operations   4 Reporting Accidents   3 Personal Protective Equipment at Work   4 Health and Hygiene   3 Fire and Emergency   9 Work at Height   5 Work Equipment   4 Special Site Hazards   3 Electrotechnical   6 Environmental To successfully pass an assessment, 43 out of the 50 questions must be answered correctly. If the delegate is unsuccessful they may take a new assessment. A fee is chargeable by the assessment organisation for each assessment taken by the delegate.  PREPARATION  This guide should be used to help prepare for the assessment. The guide contains all the questions that can be used to make up the awareness assessment, together with the correct answer and, where applicable, a brief explanation of the answer. The assessment uses a selection of the questions from the question bank printed in this guide, however, the four answers in the assessment may be in a different order from the order shown in this guide. There are no questions in the assessment that are not in this guide. The assessment is designed to test basic knowledge and awareness of health and safety for people working in the electrical industry and on construction sites. The awareness assessment is not trying to trip up or catch people out. all the questions in the assessment are listed in this guide. The ECS Health Safety and Environmental Awareness Assessment may be used as the end of course test for health and safety training but in no way should be considered a qualification in Health and Safety.  ENGLAND, WALES AND NORTHERN IRELAND  The ECS HSE Awareness Assessment is available online through the MyECS and Employer Portal and this remote invigilation system is the quickest and simplest way to do the assessment. For those who wish to attend a physical centre for assessments, please see the ECS website at  www.ecscard.org.uk/venues  SCOTLAND  The SJIB offers paper-based assessments across the whole of Scotland. Please call 0131 445 9216 to book an assessment or visit   www.sjib.org.uk   for more information.  ONLINE ASSESSMENTS  For remotely invigilated assessments taken at home or at work, there is a guidance video on the ECS website which shows how to set up and take assessments. This can be found at   www.ecscard.org.uk/RIS System Requirements  •   To be in a room on your own and not be disturbed •   Have a current photo ID with you •   Have a stable Internet connection and working web cam

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  IN CENTRE ASSESSMENTS  The delegate will need: •   Photographic identification such as an ECS card, current passport or in date photo driving license •   National Insurance Number •   A valid personal email address (for the result to be sent to if taking the computer-based version of the assessment). An invigilator will explain how to take the assessment, will check the delegate’ s identity and take the delegate’s photograph as a record of the person who took the assessment. For delegates that are not confident in using computer equipment, a practice test is available before the main assessment is taken. To take the practice assessment the delegate must request it from the session invigilator prior to taking the main assessment. There is no charge for the practice assessment. The invigilator will be on hand during the assessment to provide administrative support but will not offer any assistance with answering the assessment questions. If a computer-based assessment is taken the delegate will be informed of their result at the end of the assessment. The delegate will also be able to review the answers to the questions that were in their assessment.

===== PAGE 5 =====
5 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  Listed below are the areas of knowledge that will be assessed.  1. General Health & Safety  You should have a basic understanding of: •   How the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, Regulations and Approved Codes of Practice affect you •   Employer’s responsibilities under the Health and Safety at Work Act •   Your responsibilities to yourself and to others under the Health and Safety at Work Act •   How health and safety law is enforced •   The powers of Health and Safety Executive (HSE) inspectors •   The key features of health and safety signs in the workplace  2. Manual Handling Operations  You should have a basic understanding of: •   What manual handling operations mean in the context of an employee and what employers must do to protect employees from injury •   The types of injury you could suffer from carrying out manual handling tasks •   The parts of your body most likely to be affected by manual handling injuries •   How to decide whether a manual handling activity is safe •   What must be taken into account when making a manual handling risk assessment •   The principles of good manual handling techniques  3. Reporting Accidents  You should have a basic understanding of: •   The need to report injuries, accidents, certain diseases and dangerous occurrences to the Health and Safety Executive •   Why you must report accidents to your employer •   The need to record in the accident book all accidents that cause any injury whatsoever •   What reportable injuries, dangerous occurrences and reportable diseases are  4. Personal Protective Equipment at Work  You should have a basic understanding of: •   When PPE should be worn •   Why your employer must provide you with PPE •   Why you must use the PPE provided by the employer •   Why you must take care of PPE supplied for your use •   Why you must report lost or damaged PPE to your immediate superior •   The possible effects of not wearing PPE •   The limitations of PPE  5. Health and Hygiene  You should have a basic understanding of: •   The dangers of exposure to substances, such as asbestos •   The importance of good personal hygiene when working with hazardous substances •   How to reduce the risks of diseases carried by vermin •   The welfare facilities required to be provided on construction sites. •   How to reduce the risks from hand-arm vibration and noise at work  6. Fire and Emergency  You should have a basic understanding of: •   What to do in the event of an emergency at work •   The types of fire extinguishers available and the types of fires they can each be used on •   The importance of first aid following an accident •   Basic knowledge of fire safety in buildings including fire stopping and the role of the Building Safety Regulator  7. Work at Height  You should have a basic understanding of: •   The importance of using the most suitable access equipment for the task •   Only working from ladders or stepladders when the task is of low risk and short duration •   Safety precautions to be taken when using scaffolds, mobile elevated work platforms, safety harnesses etc.  8. Work Equipment  You should have a basic understanding of: •   Only using work equipment you have been trained and authorised to use •   The importance of carrying out checks on equipment before use •   Reporting any defects and not using defective equipment •   The use of reduced low voltage systems to supply hand-held electrical equipment on construction sites •   The safe use of extension cables  9. Special Site Hazards  You should have a basic understanding of: •   The safety precautions to be taken before working in a confined space •   The precautions to be taken when carrying out excavation work to reduce the risks from contact with underground services, falling materials etc. •   The precautions to be taken when working near overhead power lines •   The dangers to pedestrians from vehicles on site •   The additional risks to young people at work and those working alone

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  10. Electrotechnical  You should have an understanding of: •   The effects of electric current on the body •   The types of socket outlets used on construction sites •   The need for persons working on electrical systems to be competent to do so •   The use of residual current devices for additional protection against electric shock •   Safe isolation procedures when working on electrical systems and equipment •   Only working ‘live’ in exceptional circumstances •   Safe working with optical fibres  11. Environmental  You should have an understanding of: •   The responsibilities and requirements for handling materials •   Actions for recycling and to minimise waste •   The identification of hazardous/special waste •   The precautions and procedures for handling hazardous/special waste •   Sustainability in the selection and use of materials

===== PAGE 7 =====
7 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  GENERAL HEALTH AND SAFETY AT WORK QUESTION 1.1  What do the letters CDM stand for? A.   Control of Demolition and Management Regulations   Right Answer: D  The CDM Regulations impose duties to manage construction projects, ensure physical safeguards are provided to prevent danger during such projects and that adequate welfare facilities are provided. B.   Control of Dangerous Materials Regulations C.   Construction (Demolition Management) Regulations D.   Construction (Design and Management) Regulations  QUESTION 1.2  Identify one method of enforcing regulations that are available to the Health and Safety Executive: A.   Health Notice   Right Answer: B  Improvement notices require action to achieve standards which meet health and safety law. B.   Improvement Notice C   Obstruction Notice D.   Increasing insurance premiums  QUESTION 1.3  What happens if a Prohibition Notice is issued by an Inspector of the local authority or the HSE? A.   The work in hand can be completed, but no new work started  Right Answer: C  The work activity covered by a prohibition notice must cease, until the identified danger is removed. B.   The work can continue if adequate safety precautions are put in place C.   The work that is subject to the notice must cease D.   The work can continue, provided a risk assessment is carried out  QUESTION 1.4  Health and Safety Executive Inspector can? A.   Only visit if they have made an appointment   Right Answer: B  Inspectors have a range of powers, including the right to visit premises at any time. B.   Visit at any time C.   Only visit if accompanied by the principal contractor D.   Only visit to interview the site manager  QUESTION 1.5  Prohibition Notice means: A.   When you finish the work you must not start   again   Right Answer: B  The work activity covered by the prohibition notice must cease, until the identified danger is removed. B.   The work must stop immediately C.   Work is to stop for that day only D.   Work may continue until the end of the day  QUESTION 1.6  In what circumstances can an HSE Improvement Notice be issued? A.   If there is a breach of legal requirements   Right Answer: A  Improvement notices require action to achieve standards which meet health and safety law. B.   By warrant through the police C.   Only between Monday and Friday on site D.   Through the prosecution office

===== PAGE 8 =====
8  QUESTION 1.7  What is an Improvement Notice? A.   A notice issued by the site principal contractor to tidy up the site  Right Answer: D  Improvement notices require action to achieve standards which meet health and safety law. B.   A notice from the client to the principal contractor to speed up the work C.   A notice issued by a Building Control Officer to deepen foundations D.   A notice issued by an HSE/local authority Inspector to enforce compliance with health and safety legislation  QUESTION 1.8  If a Health and Safety Executive Inspector issues a Prohibition Notice, this means that: A.   The Site Manager can choose whether or not to ignore the notice  Right Answer: B  Prohibition notices are intended to stop activities which can cause serious injury. B.   Specific work activities, highlighted on the notice, must stop C.   The HSE must supervise the work covered by the notice D.   The HSE must supervise all work from then on  QUESTION 1.9  Employers are required to provide information to their employees on their health and safety rights and responsibilities and how to get advice by: A.   Telling them verbally when they start work for them   Right Answer: B  This is a requirement of the Health and Safety Information for Employees Regulations (as amended). B.   Displaying a poster or giving them leaflets approved by the HSE C.   Making them read the company health and safety policy D.   E-mailing the information to them  QUESTION 1.10  Who is responsible for signing a Company Safety Policy? A.   Site Manager   Right Answer: D  The Health and Safety at Work Act requires the most senior member of management to sign the health and safety policy statement. B.   Company Safety Officer C.   Company Secretary D.   Managing Director  QUESTION 1.11  Which one of the following must be in a company’s written Health and Safety Policy? A.   Aims and objectives of the company   Right Answer: B  This is a specific requirement of the Health and Safety at Work Act. B.   Organisation and arrangements in force for carrying out the health and safety policy C.   Name of the Health and Safety Adviser D.   Company Director’s home address  HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT

===== PAGE 9 =====
9  HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT QUESTION 1.12  Employers have to produce a written Health and Safety Policy statement when: A.   A contract commences   Right Answer: B  This is a specific requirement of the Health and Safety at Work Act. B.   They employ five people or more C.   The safety representative requests it D.   The HSE notifies them  QUESTION 1.13  Companies employing five or more people must have a written Health and Safety Policy because: A.   The principal contractor gives them work on site   Right Answer: B  B.   The HSAWA 1974 requires it C.   The Social Security Act requires it D.   The trade unions require it  QUESTION 1.14  What do the letters HSE stand for? A.   Highly Safe Electrician   Right Answer: D  The Health and Safety Executive was established under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974. B.   Health and Safety Exercise C.   Health and Safety Examiner D.   Health and Safety Executive  QUESTION 1.15  The Health and Safety Executive is: A.   Part of the National Health Service   Right Answer: B  The Health and Safety Executive is part of the Department for Work and Pensions. B.   The regulatory body for the promotion of health and safety at work C.   The jury in health and safety court cases D.   Part of the police force  QUESTION 1.16  The Health and Safety at Work Act requires employers to provide what for their employees? A.   Adequate rest periods   Right Answer: C  This is a specific requirement of Section 2 of the Health and Safety at Work Act. B.   Payment for work done C.   A safe place of work D.   Suitable transport to work  QUESTION 1.17  The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 and any regulations made under the Act are: A.   Not compulsory, but should be complied with if convenient  Right Answer: D  The requirements of health and safety law are mandatory and failure to follow them can lead to prosecution. B.   Advisory to companies and individuals C.   Practical advice for the employer to follow D.   Legally binding

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 1.18  Under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, which of the following have a duty to work safely? A.   Employees only   Right Answer: D  Employers, employees and the self-employed all have duties to work safely under the Act. B.   The general public C.   Employers only D.   All people at work  QUESTION 1.19  What is the MAXIMUM penalty that a Higher Court, can currently impose for a breach of the Health and Safety at Work Act? A.   £20,000 fine and two years’ imprisonment   Right Answer: D  A Lower Court can impose a fine of up to £20,000 and/or up to six months imprisonment for certain offences. The potential fine in a Higher Court, however, is unlimited and the term of imprisonment can be up to 2 years. B.   £15,000 fine and three years’ imprisonment C.   £1,000 fine and six months imprisonment D.   Unlimited fine and two years’ imprisonment  QUESTION 1.20  What do the letters ACOP stand for? A.   Accepted Code of Provisions   Right Answer: C  An ACOP is a code of practice approved by the Health and Safety Executive (or the Health and Safety Commission prior to April 2008). B.   Approved Condition of Practice C.   Approved Code of Practice D.   Accepted Code of Practice  QUESTION 1.21  Where should you look for official advice on health and safety matters? A.   A set of health and safety guidelines provided by suppliers   Right Answer: C  The HSE is the UK enforcing body and its guidance can be regarded as ‘official’. B.   The health and safety rules as laid down by the employer C.   Guidance issued by the Health and Safety Executive D.   A professionally approved guide book on regulations  QUESTION 1.22  Regulations that govern health and safety on construction sites: A.   Apply only to inexperienced workers   Right Answer: D  The requirements of health and safety law are mandatory, and failure to follow them can lead to prosecutions. B.   Do not apply during ’out of hours’ working C.   Apply only to large companies D.   Are mandatory (that is, compulsory)  QUESTION 1.23  Which of the following statements is correct? A.   The duty for health and safety falls only on the employer   Right Answer: B  This is a legal requirement under Section 7 of the Health & Safety at Work Act. B.   All employees must take reasonable care, not only to protect themselves but also their colleagues C.   Employees have no responsibility for Health and Safety on site D.   Only the client is responsible for safety on site

===== PAGE 11 =====
11 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 1.24  Who of the following would you expect to be responsible for managing health and safety on site? A.   Foreman   Right Answer: B  The responsibility for management of health and safety at work rests with the employer. B.   Your employer C.   Main sub-contractor D.   HSE Inspector  QUESTION 1.25  Which of the following is correct for risk assessment? A.   It is a good idea but not essential   Right Answer: C  There is a legal requirement for all work to be suitably risk assessed. B.   Only required to be done for hazardous work C.   Must always be done D.   Only required on major jobs  QUESTION 1.26  In the context of a risk assessment, what do you understand by the term risk? A.   An unsafe act or condition   Right Answer: D  Hazard and risk are not the same. Risk reflects the chance of being harmed by a hazard. B.   Something with the potential to cause injury C.   Any work activity that can be described as dangerous D.   The likelihood that harm from a particular hazard will occur  QUESTION 1.27  Who would you expect to carry out a risk assessment on your working site? A.   The CDM Co-ordinator   Right Answer: D  A risk assessment must be conducted by a ‘competent person’. B.   A visiting HSE Inspector C.   The construction project designer D.   A competent person  QUESTION 1.28  What is a HAZARD? A.   Where an accident is likely to happen   Right Answer: C  Examples of hazards include: a drum of acid, breeze blocks on an elevated plank; cables running across a floor. B.   An accident waiting to happen C.   Something with the potential to cause harm D.   The likelihood of something going wrong  QUESTION 1.29  What must be done before any work begins? A.   Emergency plan   Right Answer: B  This is a legal requirement of the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations. B.   Assessment of risk C.   Soil assessment D.   Geological survey

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 1.30  Complete the following sentence: A risk assessment: A.   Is a piece of paper required by law   Right Answer: C  Risk assessment involves a careful review of what can cause harm and the practical measures to be taken to reduce the risk of harm. B.   Prevents accidents C.   Is a means of analysing what might go wrong D.   Isn’t particularly useful  QUESTION 1.31  Why would your supervisor ask you to read the method statement and risk assessment before you start your next job? A.   They think you have got nothing better to do   Right Answer: B  The supervisor must, by law, keep workers advised of significant risks, and control measures. B.   The documents contain information on how to carry out the job in a safe manner C.   They wouldn’t as they think they are a waste of time D.   As someone has taken the time and trouble to write them, you might as well read them  QUESTION 1.32  What do the blue and white health and safety signs tell you? A.   Things you must do   Right Answer: A  Blue and   white signs show   a ‘mandatory’ requirement. B.   Where the nearest fire exit is C.   The hazards in the area D.   Things you must not do  QUESTION 1.33  What colours are emergency exit signs? A.   Green and white   Right Answer: A  The colours are prescribed in the Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations. B.   Red and yellow C.   Red and white D.   Blue and white  QUESTION 1.34  What is the main colour on a safety sign stating that you must NOT do something? A.   Blue   Right Answer: C  Prohibitory signs are round and feature a black pictogram on a white background with red edging and diagonal line. B.   Green C.   Red D.   Yellow  QUESTION 1.35  The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of signs. What colours are used on a sign indicating a warning, for example ‘Fork-lift trucks operating’? A.   Blue and white   Right Answer: C  Warning signs are triangular and feature a black pictogram on a yellow background with black edging. B.   Green and white C.   Yellow and black D.   Red and white

===== PAGE 13 =====
13 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 1.36  The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are used on a sign indicating a prohibited activity, for example ‘No access for pedestrians’ ? A.   Green and white   Right Answer: B  Prohibitory signs are round and feature a black pictogram on a white background with red edging and diagonal line. B.   Red, black and white C.   Blue and white D.   Yellow and black  QUESTION 1.37  The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are used on a sign indicating a mandatory activity, for example ‘Safety helmets must be worn’? A.   Green and white   Right Answer: C  Mandatory signs are round and feature a white pictogram on a blue background. B.   Red, black and white C.   Blue and white D.   Yellow and black  QUESTION 1.38  The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are used on a sign indicating a safe condition, for example First Aid kit? A.   Red, black and white   Right Answer: D  Emergency escape and first-aid signs are rectangular or square and feature a white pictogram on a green background. B.   Blue and white C.   Yellow and black D.   Green and white  QUESTION 1.39  Why should regular inspections of the workplace take place? A.   To check whether the working environment is safe   Right Answer: A  The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations require that routine inspections of workplaces are carried out to ensure that preventative and protective measures are in place and effective. B.   To check that all employees are present C.   To check that everyone is doing their job D.   To prepare for a visit from an HSE Inspector  QUESTION 1.40  How can you help to prevent accidents? A.   Don’t report them   Right Answer: C  Action to improve safety can only be taken if the risk is known about. Employees have a duty of care to other employees. B.   Know how to get help quickly C.   Report any unsafe conditions D.   Know where the first-aid kit is kept

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  MANUAL HANDLING OPERATIONS QUESTION 2.1  If there is a risk of injury from lifting loads what should you think about first? A.   Whether the load needs to be lifted at all   Right Answer: A  If possible, it is best to avoid the risks from lifting altogether. This is the preferred requirement laid down in the Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992. B.   What the weight of the load is C.   Where to hold the load when lifting D.   How to lift the load  QUESTION 2.2  Before performing manual lifting what is the first thing you should do? A.   Check the headroom   Right Answer: C  If you assess the whole task first, you will have a clear idea of possible hazards and how to overcome them, before lifting. B.   Weigh the article C.   Assess the whole task D.   Kick it to see if it is stable  QUESTION 2.3  Which is the part of your body MOST LIKELY to be injured during a manual handling activity which involves moving a heavy load? A.   Knees   Right Answer: D  HSE statistics show that most manual handling injuries are to the back. B.   Forearms C.   Chest D.   Back  QUESTION 2.4  What should you do if your supervisor asks you to move something that you find is too heavy to lift? A.   Give it a try using correct lifting methods   Right Answer: C  The HSE advises employees to inform the employer if they identify hazardous handling activities. B.   Ask your mates to assist in the lift C.   Inform your supervisor that it is too heavy D.   Get a forklift truck or lifting tackle  QUESTION 2.5  What would you NOT consider in making a judgement of the risks from a load? A.   Its size and condition   Right Answer: B  A, C and D can all affect the difficulty of lifting an object. B.   Its colour C.   Its weight D.   Its centre of gravity  QUESTION 2.6  When moving a load fitted with wheels which of the following is generally true? A.   Pushing and pulling are equally risky   Right Answer: C  The operator should try to push rather than pull when moving a load, provided they can see over it and control steering and stopping. B.   Pulling is preferable to pushing C.   Pushing is preferable to pulling D.   It is safer to pick it up and carry it

===== PAGE 15 =====
15 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 2.7  A manual handling operation is defined as which one of the following? A.   Automated effort   Right Answer: B  Manual handling covers human effort only. B.   Human effort C.   Mechanised and human effort D.   Mechanised effort  QUESTION 2.8  What is the MAXIMUM weight that an individual may lift? A.   The weight they can lift comfortably   Right Answer: A  There are no strict weight limits – the priority is to avoid injury. B.   Whatever the supervisor instructs C.   35kg provided that it has no sharp edges D.   15kg provided that it is a compact load  QUESTION 2.9  What is the most common type of injury resulting from lifting loads from the floor? A.   Vibration white finger   Right Answer: D  As shown by HSE statistics. B.   Grazes to the knees C.   Head injuries D.   Back injuries  QUESTION 2.10  Where a load has to be lifted manually, what is the employer required to do by law? A.   Calculate the cost of the exercise   Right Answer: C  This is a specific requirement of the Manual Handling Operations regulations 1992. B.   Determine the number of people required C.   Assess the risk of the task D.   Assess the time the job will take  QUESTION 2.11  Which of the following is advisable when lifting a load manually? A.   Keep legs straight, bend back, use power of legs   Right Answer: C  Stooping can increase the stress on the lower back. However, stooping slightly may be preferable to adopting a squatting posture, which can place excessive loads on knees and hips. B.   Bend the knees, keep the back straight, use power of back C.   Bend the knees, keep the back as straight as possible, use power of legs D.   Keep legs and back straight, use power of legs  QUESTION 2.12  In manual handling, which of the following general statements is true? A.   You should keep your back bent when lifting   Right Answer: C  This is a recommendation (INDG143). B.   Anyone can carry any load as long as they are strong enough C.   Large loads should be broken down into smaller loads where possible D.   Loads should be held at arm’s length while carrying

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 2.13  What is the recommended limit for a compact load, that can be safely carried by a fit, male worker? A.   50kg   Right Answer: D  This figure is in HSE guidance, and relates to lifting and lowering at elbow height. B.   40kg C.   20kg D.   25kg  QUESTION 2.14  Where there has been a major change in a manual handling operation, what should the employer do? A.   Monitor the operation being undertaken   Right Answer: C  This is a specific requirement of the Manual Handling Operations regulations 1992. B.   Review the number of people involved C.   Review the original risk assessment D.   Monitor the cost of change  QUESTION 2.15  What should be the first consideration when you are about to lift a load on your own? A.   Assess whether it is safe to lift it on your own   Right Answer: A  Employees should assess whether there is a risk of injury before lifting. If they are not sure they should seek advice from their supervisor. B.   Ensure you wear appropriate PPE C.   Wear gloves and grip properly D.   Ensure you lift with a bent back  QUESTION 2.16  Which of the following would NOT make a load easier to handle manually? A.   Painting it a bright colour   Right Answer: A  B.   Securing the load so that it does not shift unexpectedly C.   Reducing its weight D.   Providing suitable handles or hand grips  QUESTION 2.17  If there is a risk of injury from moving loads what should you think about? A.   Advising your supervisor   Right Answer: A  This is a requirement of the Manual Handling Operations regulations 1992. B.   Carrying it anyway C.   Dragging it all the way D.   Getting someone to assist you over the distance  QUESTION 2.18  As an approximate guide the manual handling capacity of a two person team is: A.   The sum of their individual capacities   Right Answer: D  This is contained in HSE guidance on the Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992. B.   The capacity of the strongest individual C.   The capacity of the weakest individual D.   Two thirds the sum of their individual capacities

===== PAGE 17 =====
17 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 2.19  What does ’Kinetic lifting’ mean? A.   Using a crane or some other mechanical means   Right Answer: C  B.   Using a forklift truck or pallet truck C.   Lifting in the most safe and effective way D.   Getting a friend to help you with the load  QUESTION 2.20  What should you do first before lifting or moving a load? A.   Put on gloves   Right Answer: B  You or your employer must assess the risk of injury before lifting. B.   Assess the weight C.   Keep a straight back D.   Bend your knees  QUESTION 2.21  Before picking up a load, you should: A.   Bend your knees   Right Answer: D  You or your employer must assess the risk of injury before lifting. B.   Choose a pair of gloves C.   Ask a work mate to help you D.   Assess the risks  QUESTION 2.22  When picking up an object, you should: A.   Bend your arms   Right Answer: D  Generally, the legs should do most of the work when lifting a load. B.   Bend your back C.   Wear a back brace D.   Bend your knees  QUESTION 2.23  When judging ‘individual capability’ for manual handling, you should assume: A.   All women are equally capable   Right Answer: C  Assessing ability for manual handling must be done on an individual basis. B.   Young men are weak C.   All people are different D.   All men are equally capable  QUESTION 2.24  When an article has to be moved for a long distance, you should: A.   Use a barrow or trolley   Right Answer: A  The use of handling aids can reduce the risk of injury. B.   Get someone else to do it for you C.   Drag it all the way D.   Carry it all the way

===== PAGE 18 =====
18 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 2.25  Which is the correct way to lift a load? A.   Squat near load, bend back and use leg muscles   Right Answer: B  Handling techniques which allow the use of relatively strong leg muscles rather than those of the back are preferable. B.   Squat near to the load, keeping the back as straight as possible and using leg muscles C.   Keep feet apart and bend back D.   Keep feet together and bend back  QUESTION 2.26  Which would you consider to be generally correct when lifting a load? A.   Larger loads should be split into smaller loads if possible   Right Answer: A  This is a recommendation in HSE guidance (INDG143). B.   Keep the load away from the body C.   When lifting you should bend your back D.   The feet should be together and the load lifted at arm’s length  QUESTION 2.27  If a load has an uneven centre of gravity, how should you lift it? A.   Keep the heaviest side of the load away from you   Right Answer: C  There is less risk of injury if a weight’ s centre of gravity is near the torso. B.   Keep the heaviest side of the load on the strongest arm C.   Keep the heaviest side of the load towards you D.   Keep the heaviest side of the load on the weakest arm

===== PAGE 19 =====
19 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  REPORTING ACCIDENTS QUESTION 3.1  What should you ensure if you suffer an injury through a manual handling operation? A.   You get paid for the job   Right Answer: B  All injuries must be recorded in the company accident book (BI 510). B.   The injury is recorded C.   You get help and carry on working D.   You take time off work  QUESTION 3.2  Why should a serious accident be reported to the enfourcing authority? A.   It helps the site find out what caused it   Right Answer: B  Serious accidents (specified injuries or those resulting in an absence of over 7 days) must be reported to the enforcing authority under the Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrencs Regulations (RIDDOR). B.   It is legal requirement C.   So that the site manager can see who is to blame D.   So that the company will be held responsible  QUESTION 3.3  What immediate action should you take if you suffer an injury through carrying a load? A.   Advise your doctor of your injury   Right Answer: B  All injuries must be recorded in the company accident book (BI 510). B.   Tell your supervisor or employer C.   Tell your working companion D.   Carry on working as best you can  QUESTION 3.4  Under RIDDOR, which one of the following must be reported to the enforcing authority? A.   Accidents where the injured person wishes to make a claim  Right Answer: B  This is one of a number of reportable ‘specified injuries’ and must be reported to the enforcing authority under Reporting of injuries. Diseases and Dangerous Occurances Regulations (RIDDDOR). B.   Fracture other than to fingers, thumbs or toes C.   All ‘near misses’ even if no one is hurt D.   All accidents casing injury  QUESTION 3.5  Which of the following has the power to examine an accident record? A.   An HSE inspector   Right Answer: A  HSE inspectors have a range of powers, including this one. B.   An Insurance company C.   A doctor D.   A workmate

===== PAGE 20 =====
20 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 3.6  Which of the following should be recorded in the accident book following an accident? A.   The date and time the accident occurred   Right Answer: A  The information to be entered in an accident book (BI 510) includes when and where the accident happened, the name and address and occupation of the person who had the accident and details of how the accident happened and the injuries suffered. The weather conditions would only be included if they contributed to the accident. B.   Your date of birth C.   The weather conditions D.   Your National Insurance Number  QUESTION 3.7  Which one of the following accounts for most accidents each year on construction sites? A.   Strikes by moving vehicles   Right Answer: D  HSE Statistics show clearly that there are more slips, trips and falls than any other types of accident on site. B.   Electrocution C.   Trench collapses D.   Slips, trips and falls  QUESTION 3.8  Which of the following is NOT classified as a specified injury to a worker under RIDDOR? A.   A fractured finger   Right Answer: A  Amputation of an arm, hand, finger, thumb, leg, foot or toe are classified as specified injuries, as are bone fractures other than to fingers, thumbs or toes. B.   A fractured arm C.   Amputation of a finger D.   A broken wrist  QUESTION 3.9  Which one of the following should you do if you witness a serious accident on site? A.   Pretend you saw nothing   Right Answer: D  If the supervisor is aware of an accident he can take steps to prevent a recurrence. The employer also has legal duties to report certain incidents to the enforcing authority. B.   Say nothing in case you get in trouble C.   Discuss what to do with your workmates D.   Tell your supervisor what you saw happening  QUESTION 3.10  A workmate tells you that he witnessed an accident the previous day and the victim was taken to hospital. He asks you for advice on what he should do. Do you tell them to: A.   Speak to the site nurse about what he saw   Right Answer: B  If the supervisor is aware of an accident he can take steps to prevent a recurrence. The employer also has legal duties to report certain incidents to the enforcing authority. B.   Tell their supervisor that they saw what happened C.   Telephone the hospital to find out how the injured person is D.   Say nothing to anyone in case they get someone in trouble

===== PAGE 21 =====
21 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 3.11  If a person at work suffers an injury (other than a specified injury) due to an accident at work, it is reportable under RIDDOR if they are incapacitated for work for: A.   Over 1 day   Right Answer: B  An over-seven-day injury is one which is not a specified injury but results in the injured person being away from work or unable to do the full range of their normal duties for more than seven days (including any days they wouldn’t normally be expected to work such as weekends, rest days or holidays) not counting the day of the injury itself. B.   Over 7 days C.   Over half a day D.   Over 2 days  QUESTION 3.12  What must an employer do with their accident records following completion of a construction project? A.   They are sent to the Health and Safety Executive   Right Answer: C  Accident records must be kept by an employer for at least three years. B.   They are destroyed on site with other non-essential documents C.   They are kept safe by the employer D.   They are sent to the employer’s insurance company  QUESTION 3.13  At work who would you report a dangerous occurrence to? A.   The emergency services   Right Answer: B  Under RIDDOR. an employer has a legal duty to report certain work-related accidents, but to do this they will need to know that an accident has occurred. B.   Your supervisor or employer C.   Another employee D.   The client for the project  QUESTION 3.14  Following a reportable dangerous occurrence when must the enforcing authority be informed? A.   Within 5 days   Right Answer: C  The enforcing authority must be notified by the quickest practicable means. B.   Within 48 hours C.   Without delay D.   Within 24 hours  QUESTION 3.15  Accidents causing any injury should always be recorded in: A.   The site engineer’s day book   Right Answer: B  All accidents should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510). B.   Your employer’s accident recording system C.   Your personal diary D.   The main contractor’s diary

===== PAGE 22 =====
22 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 3.16  Which one of the following is classified as a reportable occupational disease under RIODOR? A.   Mental disorder   Right Answer: B  Certain occupational diseases likely to have been caused or made worse by work are reportable under RIODOR. This would include occupational asthma where the person’ s work includes significant or regular exposure to a known respiratory sensitizer. B.   Occupational asthma C.   Amputation D.   Influenza  QUESTION 3.17  When a person is injured at work, who should enter the details in the accident book? A.   The injured person’s supervisor   Right Answer: B  This is the procedure for recording accidents internally in the accident book (Bl 510). B.   The injured person or anyone acting for them C.   The site manager or engineer D.   The site safety manager  QUESTION 3.18  If you are involved in a minor accident at work, whose duty is it to report it to site management? A.   Any witness to the accident   Right Answer: C  Employers rely on employees to advise them of occurrences at work. B.   The police, fire or ambulance who attend C.   It is your own responsibility D.   The site foreman should report it  QUESTION 3.19  You have suffered an accident at work which has made you incapable of your normal work for over 7 days. Which of the following actions MUST be taken by your employer? A.   The emergency services are asked to attend the site   Right Answer: C  An over-seven-day injury is one which is not a specified injury but results in the injured person being away from work or unable to do the full range of their normal duties for more than seven days (including any days they wouldn’ t normally be expected to work such as weekends, rest days or holidays) not counting the day of the injury itself. B.   The local hospital is informed C.   The relevant enforcing authority is informed D.   A deduction is made from your wages for days lost  QUESTION 3.20  The collapse of scaffolding is only notifiable to the enforcing authority as a reportable dangerous occurrence when the scaffolding is which one of the following? A.   Over 15 metres in height   Right Answer: D  This is one of the requirements of RIDDOR. B.   Any height C.   Over 10 metres in height D.   Over 5 metres in height

===== PAGE 23 =====
23 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 3.21  If there is a fatal accident on site, when must the Health and Safety Executive be informed? A.   Without delay   Right Answer: A  The enforcing authority must be notified by the quickest practicable means. B.   Within 10 days C.   Within 7 days D.   Within 5 days  QUESTION 3.22  Under which of the following circumstances should an accident be recorded in the site’s accident book? A.   When an accident causes damage to plant or equipment   Right Answer: D  An accident causing an injury to an employee at work should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510). B.   Only when a person is injured and will be off work for more than seven days C.   When the injury is serious enough for first aid to be needed D.   When an accident causes injury to an employee while at work  QUESTION 3.23  Which of the following have to be entered into the accident book? A.   All accidents causing any damage   Right Answer: B  An accident causing an injury to an employee at work should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510). B.   All accidents causing an injury C.   Only accidents causing serious injury D.   Only accidents causing time off work  QUESTION 3.24  Under which of the following circumstances must injury accidents be recorded in the accident book? A.   Only if you break a bone   Right Answer: C  An accident causing an injury to an employee at work should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510). B.   Only if you have time off work C.   Any time they occur D.   Only if you need to go to hospital  QUESTION 3.25  An entry must be made in the accident book when: A.   The person has been off sick for over seven days   Right Answer: C  An accident causing an injury to an employee at work should be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510). B.   Management thinks it is appropriate C.   An accident causes personal injury to an employee D.   The severity of the accident may result in a compensation claim  QUESTION 3.26  Which of the following MUST be recorded in an accident book after you have had an accident? A.   Your National Insurance number   Right Answer: C  The information to be entered in an accident book (Bl 510) includes when and where the accident happened, the name, address and occupation of the person who had the accident and details of how the accident happened and the injuries suffered. B.   Your date of birth C.   Your occupation D.   Your phone number

===== PAGE 24 =====
24 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 3.27  Which of the following can you learn from an accident? A.   A combination of human error and mechanical failure always causes injury  Right Answer: B  An accident investigation should not only assess the cause, but also how similar accidents can be prevented in the future. B.   Ideas on how you would prevent it happening again C.   That mechanical failures are most dangerous D.   How human error is always a cause  QUESTION 3.28  Could making an entry in the accident book help you if you later make a claim for compensation? A.   Only if it is a serious injury   Right Answer: D  This is laid down in Social Security Legislation. B.   No C.   Only in the event of a fatality D.   Yes  QUESTION 3.29  Why is it important to report ‘near miss’ accidents to your employer? A.   It’s the law   Right Answer: C  HSE advises that ‘near misses’ should be investigated to prevent their recurrence. B.   To make the figures look good C.   So lessons can be learned, preventing an accident next time D.   So that someone can be disciplined  QUESTION 3.30  Who should you report serious accidents to? A.   Your workmate   Right Answer: B  If the supervisor is aware of an accident he can take steps to prevent a recurrence. The employer also has legal duties to report certain incidents to the enforcing authority. B.   Your employer or supervisor C.   The police D.   The ambulance service  QUESTION 3.31  What is the aim of carrying out an accident investigation? A.   To determine the cause(s) and prevent similar accidents   Right Answer: A  An accident investigation should not only assess the cause, but also how similar accidents can be prevented in the future. B.   To establish what injuries were sustained C.   To find out who is at fault D.   To establish the cost of any damage incurred  QUESTION 3.32  You have witnessed a serious accident on your site and are interviewed by an HSE inspector. You should: A.   Tell the inspector what your mates said you should say   Right Answer: C  This is good practice, but it can also be an offence to withhold important information from an inspector. B.   Ask your supervisor what you should say to the inspector C.   Co-operate fully with the inspector and tell them exactly what you saw D.   Don’t tell them anything

===== PAGE 25 =====
25 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT AT WORK QUESTION 4.1  When working in dusty conditions, what of the following would give the LEAST level of protection? A.   Compressed airline breathing helmet   Right Answer: D  Protection factors are given in HSE publication HSG53 ‘Respiratory protective equipment at work – A practical guide’. B.   Positive pressure powered respirator C.   Self-contained breathing apparatus D.   Half mask dust respirator  QUESTION 4.2  In hot weather which one of the following is correct with regard to safety helmets? A.   You can take off your helmet while working inside the building  Right Answer: B  On construction sites, despite controls being put in place, there will always be situations where a risk of head injury remains. Taking off your helmet would put you at a much greater risk of a head injury and any unauthorised modification would be in breach of legal requirements and could render the helmet next to useless. B.   You must continue to wear your helmet C.   You can drill holes in your safety hat for ventilation D.   You do not need to wear your helmet  QUESTION 4.3  Which one of the following should you do if your personal protective equipment (PPE) is damaged? A.   Obtain new equipment when available   Right Answer: B  Employees are required to report any defective PPE to their employer (PPE at Work Regulations 1992, Regulation 7). B.   Report to your Supervisor without delay C.   Reduce the amount of time you sue it D.   Carry on working  QUESTION 4.4  If personal protective equipment (PPE ) is defective, what should you do? A.   Complain to the Health and Safety Inspector   Right Answer: C  Employees are required to report any defective PPE to their employer (PPE at Work Regulations 1992, Regulation 7). B.   Get your workmate to mend it if possible C.   Report it to your supervisor D.   Repair if possible and continue to use it  QUESTION 4.5  In normal use, what item of PPE is NOT essential for the operator of a cartridge-operated tool, such as a nail gun? A.   Safety eyewear   Right Answer: C  Wellingtons do not offer protection against the specific risks associated with the use of a cartridge-operated tool, although safety footwear must always be work when there is a risk of a foot injury. B.   Hearing protection C.   Wellington boots D.   Safety helmet  QUESTION 4.6  Can you opt out of wearing personal protective equipment (PPE)? A.   Yes, by informing the site supervisor   Right Answer: C  You cannot legally ‘opt out’ of being protected from significant risks at work. This includes wearing the necessary PPE. B.   Yes, by writing officially to your employer C.   No, you cannot opt out D.   Yes, if it is uncomfortable

===== PAGE 26 =====
26 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 4.7  What is the most important item of personal protective equipment (PPE) when working on or near a highway? A.   Safety footwear   Right Answer: D  A high visibility vest is the most important of PPE however, the other items of PPE may also be required. B.   Waterproof clothing C.   Hard hat D.   High visibility vest  QUESTION 4.8  If you are drilling into concrete with a masonry drill, in which one of the following circumstances will you need to wear eye protection? A.   Always   Right Answer: A  Suitable eye protection must always be worn when working with power-driven tools where chippings are likely to fly or abrasive materials could be propelled. B.   Only when drilling overhead C.   Only if the drill is bigger than 10mm D.   Not if drilling into the floor  QUESTION 4.9  When must you wear all personal protective equipment (PPE) provided by your employer? A.   As instructed by your employer   Right Answer: A  Under the PPE at Work Regulations 1992, employees must wear PPE as instructed. B.   Only if it fits C.   When you want to D.   Only when you need to  QUESTION 4.10  When MUST an employer provide their employees with personal protective equipment (PPE)? A.   When they may be exposed to a risk to their health and safety which cannot be controlled another way  Right Answer: A  As required by regulation 4 of the PPE Regulations. B.   Twice a year C.   If the client or main contractor specifies it in the contract D.   Every 5 years  QUESTION 4.11  What type of eye protection would you wear when using a cartridge-operated tool, such as a nail gun? A.   Impact goggles   Right Answer: A  When using a cartridge-operated tool, such as a nail gun, shatter proof goggles should be worn. B.   Sun glasses C.   Safety spectacles D.   Chemical protection glasses  QUESTION 4.12  Which of the following must your safety helmet comply with to meet with the requirements of the Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations? A.   It can be adjusted to suit your head size   Right Answer: A  An assessment of the suitability of head protection would include consideration of whether it can be adjusted to suit the individual who is to wear it, that it is compatible with the work to be done and that it is comfortable to wear. B.   It is a good visible colour C.   It has a label with your name on it D.   It is less than 1 year old

===== PAGE 27 =====
27 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 4.13  In which of the following ways should you wear your safety helmet? A.   With the peak raised to deflect falling material   Right Answer: D  Any item of personal protective equipment must be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, which will include how to correctly fit and wear it and what its limitations are. B.   With the helmet back to front C.   With the peak raised to give good vision D.   Square on your head, properly adjusted  QUESTION 4.14  When an employee has been issued with eye protection, what are their duties under the Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations? A.   To ensure that they are the right type of protector   Right Answer: C  Regulation 10(2) requires that every employee shall use any PPE in accordance with the training and instruction received. B.   Not to loan the equipment to other operatives C.   To use the protection in accordance with training and instruction D.   To pay for replacement of lost eye protection  QUESTION 4.15  When should you wear safety footwear on site? A.   Only when working on scaffolds   Right Answer: B  Suitable safety footwear should be worn if there is a risk of injury from objects falling onto the foot or sharp objects, such as nails, penetrating the sole. B.   When there is a risk of a foot injury C.   Only when working outdoors D.   Only if the site conditions are wet  QUESTION 4.16  With regard to the use of personal protective equipment (PPE), which one of the following statements is true? A.   If you do not use the personal protective equipment (PPE) provided you will probably not come to any harm  Right Answer: B  PPE is there to protect the individual. Wearing PPE does not protect other people nearby. B.   Personal protective equipment (PPE) protects only the user from the dangers present C.   Personal protective equipment (PPE) need only be provided if it is not too expensive D.   Personal protective equipment (PPE) need only be used if it is available  QUESTION 4.17  Which of the following statements is TRUE when an employer issues personal protective equipment (PPE)? A.   The employer can charge you for the full cost of it   Right Answer: B  Employers cannot charge for PPE such as hard hats, gloves, required by law (and the bulk of PPE is required by law). B.   The employer cannot charge you for it C.   The employer can charge you for up to half the cost of it D.   The employer can only charge you for it if you lose or damage it

===== PAGE 28 =====
28 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 4.18  Which one of the following must apply to any hard hat provided? A.   It is CE or UKCA marked   Right Answer: A  All PPE should be CE – marked, indicating that it meets the basic health and safety requirements. B.   It is less than 5 years old C.   It is less than 1 year old D.   It is less than 2 years old  QUESTION 4.19  When using personal protective equipment (PPE) legally you must do which of the following? A.   Not interfere with it or misuse it   Right Answer: A  Interfering with or misusing items provided in the interests of health, safety or welfare is an offence under the HSW Act 1974 (Section 8). B.   Replace it at your own expense if it is damaged C.   Return it to the manufacturer when damaged D.   Clean it properly once a week  QUESTION 4.20  If it is necessary for an employee to use personal protective equipment, who has a duty to provide it? A.   The trade union   Right Answer: C  This is a requirement of the PPE at Work Regulations 1992 (Regulation 4). B.   The employee C.   The employer D.   The principal contractor  QUESTION 4.21  When should a safety helmet be worn on site? A.   At all times unless there is no foreseeable risk of injury to the head other than by falling  Right Answer: A  The circumstances when there is no foreseeable risk of head injury from falling or swinging objects or striking the head against something will be very limited in most construction work. B.   When you are out in the open air C.   When walking to and from a place of work D.   Only when something may fall  QUESTION 4.22  A colleague has drilled holes in the top of their safety helmet because the weather is hot. Is this: A.   Acceptable if the holes are small   Right Answer: D  Interfering with or misusing items provided in the interests of health, safety or welfare is an offence under the HSW Act 1974 (section 8). B.   Their choice C.   Acceptable D.   In breach of legal requirements  QUESTION 4.23  Who has a duty to provide PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) for use by an employee? A.   The employer   Right Answer: A  This is a requirement of the PPE at Work Regulations 1992 (Regulation 4). B.   The principal contractor C.   The employee D.   The client

===== PAGE 29 =====
29 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 4.24  When would it be appropriate to wear a bump-cap instead of a safety helmet? A.   When there is no foreseeable risk of injury from falling or swinging objects  Right Answer: A  Industrial scalp protectors (bump caps) can protect against striking fixed obstacles, scalping or entanglements. They do not provide suitable protection against falling or swinging objects. B.   In warm weather C.   When working in excavations D.   When working on a ladder  QUESTION 4.25  How can you protect your eyesight while working on site? A.   By squinting   Right Answer: C  B.   By not looking directly at what you are doing C.   By wearing the correct type of eye protection D.   By wearing sunglasses  QUESTION 4.26  When is head protection required to be worn on a construction site to comply with the Personal Protective Equipment at Work Regulations? A.   At all times except by those who are self employed   Right Answer: D  If there is no risk of injury to the head, then hard hats are not required by law. However, on construction sites, despite controls being in place, there will almost always be situations where a risk of head injury remains and require head protection to be worn. Site rules will also require the wearing of head protection other than in any designated safe areas. B.   Only when you feel like it C.   At all times unless you are working on scaffold D.   At all times unless there is no foreseeable risk of injury to the head other than by falling  QUESTION 4.27  Why should a high visibility vest be worn when working on roads? A.   So road users and plant operators can see you   Right Answer: A  Many workers are struck and injured, often seriously, by moving vehicles. B.   Because you were told to do so C.   Because it will keep you warm D.   So that your mates can see you  QUESTION 4.28  When considering what measures to take to protect people’s health and safety, PPE should always be regarded as: A.   The last resort   Right Answer: A  Engineering controls and safe systems of work should always be considered first. B.   The first line of defence C.   The best way to tackle the job D.   The only practical measure

===== PAGE 30 =====
30 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  HEALTH AND HYGIENE QUESTION 5.1  Exposure to asbestos fibres may cause which one of the following? A.   Dermatitis   Right Answer: D  Breathing in asbestos fibres can also lead to a number of other diseases, including lung cancer and mesothelioma. B.   Asthma C.   Glandular fever D.   Asbestosis  QUESTION 5.2  Asbestos is suspected in the workplace, during renovation do you: A.   Remove it   Right Answer: D  Competent advice must be sought, to prevent exposure to the worker or others, either at the time, or subsequently. B.   Paint it C.   Ignore it D.   Seek guidance immediately  QUESTION 5.3  Which of the following statements about asbestos is TRUE? A.   Asbestos is not really a hazard to health   Right Answer: C  All forms of asbestos can cause fatal diseases. B.   White asbestos is safe to use C.   All asbestos can be a hazard to health D.   Only brown and blue asbestos are a hazard to health  QUESTION 5.4  While working you discover material you think could be asbestos. What should you do? A.   Clear any dust and fragments, put them in a bin then carry on working  Right Answer: C  It is essential to stop work if asbestos is found or suspected, and await competent advice on what to do next. B.   Inform the site nurse C.   Stop working immediately and report your suspicions to your supervisor D.   Dampen the material to prevent further dust being created, then carry on working  QUESTION 5.5  Can you tell by the smell of a product whether it is likely to cause harm? A.   No   Right Answer: A  Many harmful substances have no smell. B.   Only within an enclosed space C.   Yes D.   Only if you have been trained  QUESTION 5.6  How would you recognise a hazardous substance? A.   By a symbol on the container   Right Answer: A  A supplier of a packaged hazardous substance must include a label on the packaging incorporating one or more hazard symbols alerting users to the dangers posed by the chemical. B.   By its smell C.   The colour of the label on the container D.   It will be in a suitable container

===== PAGE 31 =====
31 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 5.7  Which of the following does NOT cause skin problems? A.   Bitumens   Right Answer: C  Asbestos is potentially very harmful if inhaled, but does not affect the skin significantly. B.   Solvents C.   Asbestos D.   Epoxy resins  QUESTION 5.8  When an assessment of hazardous substances has been carried out under the COSHH Regulations, the risks and control measures should be explained to: A.   The operatives using the substance   Right Answer: A  All those working with the hazardous substances in question need to know about any risks. B.   All employees on site C.   The accounts department D.   The person in charge of the stores  QUESTION 5.9  If your hands are very dirty, what should you use to get them clean? A.   White Spirit   Right Answer: C  The other substances can remove natural oils from the skin. B.   Paraffin C.   Soap and water D.   Thinners  QUESTION 5.10  The presence of rats on site creates a risk of catching Weil’ s disease. What is the EASIEST PRACTICAL MEASURE that you can take to discourage the presence of rats? A.   Avoid leaving scraps of food lying about   Right Answer: A  The easiest solution is to avoid leaving food around, since this is what attracts vermin. B.   Lay traps containing rat poison C.   Contact the local Environmental Health Officer D.   Bring a large cat on site  QUESTION 5.11  Why is personal hygiene so important? A.   So you don’t smell   Right Answer: C  B.   Because the COSHH regulations require it C.   To protect your own and others’ health D.   To stop you catching something nasty  QUESTION 5.12  If you have been handling lead, how is it most likely to get into your blood stream? A.   By not wearing safety goggles   Right Answer: D  The route into the body is ingestion, normally from lead contamination on the hands. B.   By not reporting the matter to the HSE C.   By not using the correct safety footwear D.   By not washing your hands before eating

===== PAGE 32 =====
32 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 5.13  The number of toilets provided on site depends on: A.   The type of work being completed   Right Answer: D  Guidance on the provision of welfare facilities is given in HSE publication ‘Health and Safety in Construction‘. B.   The ratio of male and female workers on site C.   The duration of the work on site D.   The number of personnel on site  QUESTION 5.14  Which of the following is not required to be provided under the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations? A.   Toilet facilities   Right Answer: C  Guidance on the provision of welfare facilities as required by COM is given in HSE publication ‘Health and Safety in Construction‘. B.   Washing facilities C.   Hot food D.   Drinking water  QUESTION 5.15  The extended use of powered hand-held tools and equipment may lead to which medical condition? A.   Vibration white finger   Right Answer: A  Hand-arm vibration can cause a range of conditions (including vibration white finger) collectively known as hand-arm vibration syndrome, as well as diseases such as carpal tunnel syndrome. B.   Weil’s disease C.   Asbestosis D.   Dermatitis  QUESTION 5.16  What must your employer do if the daily personal noise exposure is at or exceeds 85 db(A)? A.   Provide hearing protection to those employees who ask for it  Right Answer: B  This is an interim measure under the Control of Noise at Work Regulations 2005 when the daily personal noise exposure is at or exceeds the upper exposure action value of 85 dB(A). Exposure should subsequently be reduced by implementing organizational or technical measures. B.   Issue hearing protection to those exposed and ensure that it is worn C.   Tell employees to buy their own hearing protection D.   Report it to the Health and Safety Executive  QUESTION 5.17  What are the lower and upper action values with regard to daily personal noise exposure, as defined in the Control of Noise at Work Regulations 2005? A.   85 dB(A) and 90 dB(A)   Right Answer: B  Daily personal noise exposure is the average noise level experienced by an individual over an 8 hour period. B.   80 dB(A) and 85 dB(A) C.   70 dB(A) and 80 dB(A) D.   75 dB(A) and 85dB(A)  QUESTION 5.18  At or above what level of daily personal noise exposure does an employer have to provide hearing protection if it is requested by an employee? A.   90 dB(A)   Right Answer: C  This is one of the duties of employers under the Control of Noise at Work Regulations 2005 when the lower exposure action value of 80 dB(A) is reached or exceeded. B.   95 dB(A) C.   80 dB(A) D.   85 dB(A)

===== PAGE 33 =====
33 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 5.19  The effects of damage to your hearing by long-term exposure to high noise levels: A.   Can be corrected by an operation   Right Answer: B  Hearing damage due to long-term noise exposure is irreversible. B.   Are permanent C.   Will be reduced when you change jobs D.   Can be reversed to near normal with time  QUESTION 5.20  Hearing protection should be worn: A.   In designated areas   Right Answer: A  Employees must wear hearing protectors when exposed at or above the upper exposure action values and within hearing protection zones. B.   In noisy internal areas only C.   At any workplace D.   Only on building sites  QUESTION 5.21  Wearing suitable hearing protection: A.   Stops you hearing distracting conversations   Right Answer: C  Hearing protection still allows some noise to reach the ear, but, if it has been correctly chosen, will reduce noise levels to an acceptable level. B.   Stops you hearing all noise C.   Brings noise down to an acceptable level D.   Repairs damaged hearing  QUESTION 5.22  Which of the following is one of the recommended means of protecting your hearing? A.   Rolled tissue paper   Right Answer: D  The others are not considered to be suitable types of hearing protection. B.   Cotton wool pads C.   Soft cloth pads D.   Ear defenders  QUESTION 5.23  Which of the following would NOT reduce the risks from hand-arm vibration when using a hammer   action tool? A.   Selecting the lowest vibration tool that is suitable and which can do the work efficiently  Right Answer: D  Where tools require constant or frequent use, rotas will avoid individuals having long exposure to vibration. The use of low-vibration tools and keeping the hands warm in cold conditions will also reduce the risks. B.   Wearing gloves to keep the hands warm C.   Working as a team to share the work out D.   Making sure one person does all the work with the tool  QUESTION 5.24  Which of the following animals can carry Weil’s disease? A.   Snake   Right Answer: C  Weil’s disease is a serious and sometimes fatal infection that can be transmitted to humans by contact with infected rats. Another form of Leptospirosis infection can be transmitted from cattle to humans. B.   Sheep C.   Rat D.   Pig

===== PAGE 34 =====
34 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 5.25  You are most likely to catch Weil’s disease (Leptospirosis) if you: A.   Work near wet ground, waterways or sewers   Right Answer: A  Anyone who is exposed to rat urine is at risk, particularly sewer workers and farmers. Those in contact with canal or river water are also at risk. B.   Work near air conditioning units C.   Fix showers or baths D.   Drink water from a standpipe  QUESTION 5.26  What should you do if the toilets on your site are continually dirty? A.   Ignore the problem – its normal on a construction site   Right Answer: B  How often welfare facilities on site require cleaning will depend on the number of people on site and how quickly they get dirty. The person in control of the site should make sure someone is responsible for keeping the facilities clean and tidy. B.   Make sure you tell someone who can sort it out C.   Find some cleaning materials and clean it up yourself D.   Ask in a nearby cafe or pub if you can use their toilets  QUESTION 5.27  Excessive sunlight on bare skin can cause which serious health problem? A.   Dermatitis   Right Answer: D  Ultraviolet rays in sunlight can cause sunburn and premature ageing of the skin. The most serious effect, however, is an increased chance of developing skin cancer. B.   Rickets C.   Acne D.   Skin cancer

===== PAGE 35 =====
35 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  FIRE AND EMERGENCY QUESTION 6.1  An emergency route(s) must be provided on construction sites to ensure: A.   Safe passage to the open air   Right Answer: C  B.   Safe passage to the rest area C.   Safe passage to a secure place of safety D.   Safe passage to the ground from height  QUESTION 6.2  What action should you take if you discover a fire? A.   Leave it because you will get the blame   Right Answer: B  Raising the alarm will reduce the risk to others, particularly if the fire spreads. B.   Raise the alarm C.   Carry on working if it is safe to do so D.   Extinguish the fire without raising the alarm  QUESTION 6.3  If there had been a small fire, who should you report it to? A.   Your supervisor   Right Answer: A  The supervisor should be aware, so that further preventative measures can be considered. B.   The main contractor’s site agent C.   The site’s fire marshal D.   The resident site engineer  QUESTION 6.4  If you discover a fire at work, what should you do first: A.   Telephone 999   Right Answer: D  Raising the alarm will reduce the risk to others, particularly if the fire spreads. B.   Use a fire extinguisher to put it out C.   Run around looking for an alarm to sound D.   Raise the alarm and warn fellow workers  QUESTION 6.5  What is a fire assembly point? A.   The place to go when the fire alarm sounds   Right Answer: A  It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the event of a fire. B.   A place where the fire brigade goes to C.   A place where fire extinguishers are kept D.   The place where the fire alarm is  QUESTION 6.6  Where would you go in the event of a fire? A.   To the canteen for a cup of tea   Right Answer: B  It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the event of a fire. B.   To the fire assembly point C.   To the site hut D.   To the fire to see what is going on

===== PAGE 36 =====
36 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 6.7  What should you do if you hear the fire alarm? A.   Ignore it because it might be someone playing around   Right Answer: C  It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the event of a fire. B.   Leave work for the day C.   Evacuate the premises to a designated place of safety D.   Go towards the sound to find out what is going on  QUESTION 6.8  All new fire extinguishers are coloured red or of bright self-coloured metal. How do you know the difference between types? A.   A different colour panel or band is on the body of the extinguishers  Right Answer: A  Different coloured bands show extinguisher types e.g. black for CO2 and blue for dry powder. B.   During site induction, you will be told where the different types of extinguishers are C.   The weight and shape of the extinguisher D.   The type of extinguisher is written on a sign next to it  QUESTION 6.9  A black-labelled fire extinguisher contains: A.   Dry powder   Right Answer: D  B.   Water C.   Foam D.   Carbon dioxide  QUESTION 6.10  What is a blue-labelled fire extinguisher filled with? A.   Water   Right Answer: C  B.   Foam C.   Dry powder D.   Carbon dioxide  QUESTION 6.11  Which fire extinguisher should not be used on flammable liquid fires? A.   Carbon dioxide   Right Answer: C  Flammable liquids spread if attacked by water extinguishers. B.   Powder C.   Water D.   Foam  QUESTION 6.12  What colour is a water filled fire extinguisher, or its label? A.   Black   Right Answer: C  B.   Cream C.   Red D.   Green

===== PAGE 37 =====
37 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 6.13  When discharging carbon dioxide fire extinguishers, the nozzle: A.   Becomes warm   Right Answer: C  The expansion of CO2 gas coming out of the nozzle causes rapid cooling. B.   Becomes very hot C.   Becomes very cold D.   Doesn’t change temperature  QUESTION 6.14  For fires involving spilled petrol, which types of fire extinguisher could you use? A.   Water, carbon dioxide or foam   Right Answer: C  Flammable liquids, such as petrol, spread if attacked by water extinguishers. B.   Water, foam or dry powder C.   Foam, carbon dioxide or dry powder D.   Water, carbon dioxide or dry powder  QUESTION 6.15  Which types of fire extinguishers should be used on electrical fires? A.   Foam and water   Right Answer: B  Liquids should not be used, since they may conduct electricity. B.   Carbon dioxide and dry powder C.   Dry powder and foam D.   Water and carbon dioxide  QUESTION 6.16  A red-labelled fire extinguisher should NOT be used: A.   On wood fires   Right Answer: B  Red denotes water. Liquids should not be used on electrical fires, since they can conduct electricity. B.   Where there is a risk of electrocution C.   On burning clothes D.   On burning furniture  QUESTION 6.17  A workmate burns their hand on a piece of very hot metal. What should you do first? A.   Rub some cream or Vaseline into the burn   Right Answer: D  Burns need immediate and sustained cooling. B.   Cover the burn with something dry C.   Warn other people about the piece of hot metal D.   Put their hand in cold water if it is available  QUESTION 6.18  Which of the following items should not be in a first   aid box? A.   Safety pins   Right Answer: B  Drugs must not be kept in a first aid box (Health and Safety guidance note INDG 214). B.   Pain killers C.   Disposable gloves D.   Triangular bandages

===== PAGE 38 =====
38 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 6.19  How often should a first-aider qualified in First Aid at Work (FAW) or Emergency First Aid at Work (EFAW) receive retraining? A.   Every six months   Right Answer: C  First Aid at Work (FAW) and Emergency First Aid at Work (EFAW) certificates are valid for three years and first-aiders are required to undertake retraining at the end of this period. However, the HSE also strongly recommends that first-aiders undertake annual (half-day) refresher training. B.   Every two years C.   Every three years D.   Every four years  QUESTION 6.20  If you came across an injury on site, what is the first thing you should do? A.   Tell the casualty to visit their doctor   Right Answer: C  Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately. B.   Inform the HSE C.   Contact a first-aider D.   Try and find out what happened  QUESTION 6.21  An employee has a fall and is obviously unconscious. What is the FIRST thing you should do? A.   Send someone for the first-aider   Right Answer: A  Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately. B.   Find out if there were any witnesses C.   Try to protect them from any further injury D.   Put them in the recovery position  QUESTION 6.22  A labourer gets an electric shock; looks a bit pale but says they are alright. What should you do? A.   Send someone for the first-aider   Right Answer: A  Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately. B.   Tell them to report it to their supervisor C.   Go and check the electrics so it cannot happen again D.   See if they want a drink or a cigarette  QUESTION 6.23  Which of the following must an employer consider when making provisions for first aid? A.   How much working space will be wasted   Right Answer: D  Employers must match first-aid provision to the nature of risks at work. B.   How much will it cost C.   Whether the local ambulance service can be used D.   The likely types of injury  QUESTION 6.24  In an on-site emergency, which of the following must a first-aider NOT do? A.   Treat an unconscious patient   Right Answer: D  First-aid is concerned with preserving life and limb, and first-aiders are not trained to dispense medical treatments. B.   Control bleeding C.   Give resuscitation D.   Give medicines to patients without authorisation

===== PAGE 39 =====
39 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 6.25  If someone has fallen over and has stopped breathing, what is the first thing you should do? A.   Send for help   Right Answer: A  Do not delay in sending for help;   then   try to start the casualty breathing. B.   Attend to any broken bones C.   Try to give the casualty a drink D.   Try to start the casualty breathing  QUESTION 6.26  If someone has fallen off a ladder and they say their leg is broken, what should you do? A.   Send for the first-aider   Right Answer: A  Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately. B.   Help them to the cabin or mess hut C.   Move the ladder so no-one trips over it D.   Bandage their legs together  QUESTION 6.27  Your workmate suddenly gets a foreign body in the eye. What should you do? A.   Take your workmate to the supervisor   Right Answer: D  Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately. B.   Use a clean handkerchief to try and remove it C.   Wash your hands before touching your mate’s face D.   Send someone for the first-aider  QUESTION 6.28  A person nearly collapses complaining of stomach pains. What should you do? A.   Send someone for the first-aider   Right Answer: A  Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately. B.   Go and find them something to drink C.   Help them to find somewhere comfortable to sit D.   Ask them if they want something to eat  QUESTION 6.29  A workmate lifting a big box suddenly shouts ‘oh, my back’ and drops the box. What should you do? A.   Tell them to leave it for someone else to lift   Right Answer: B  The priority for any back injury is to obtain first-aid advice, in order to prevent further damage. B.   Send for the first-aider C.   Help them to lift the box D.   Find them somewhere comfortable to sit and rest  QUESTION 6.30  What should you do immediately if you get a small cut on a finger whilst at work? A.   Carry on working   Right Answer: B  It is important to obtain first-aid to prevent further harm (e.g. through infection). It should also be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510). B.   Get first-aid C.   Ask your employer to report it to the HSE D.   Just wash it clean

===== PAGE 40 =====
40 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 6.31  In an emergency situation at work you should do what? A.   Phone the HSE Inspectorate   Right Answer: B  A site emergency plan should have been drawn up and you should be familiar with the emergency procedure. B.   Obey the site emergency procedure C.   Ensure your work mates are all accounted for D.   Leave the site immediately  QUESTION 6.32  What does the sound of a siren on-site normally indicate? A.   A fire   Right Answer: D  B.   A toxic escape C.   An explosion D.   An emergency  QUESTION 6.33  The purpose of fire-stopping in a building is to: A.   Prevent a fire starting   Right Answer: B  Fire-stopping is a passive fire protection measure used to seal any openings created in a fire   resistance-rated wall or floor assembly, e.g. to allow pipes or wiring systems to pass through. During fire conditions this will impede the spread of fire and smoke. B.   Delay the passage of fire and smoke through openings in walls and floors C.   Activate fire sprinklers D.   Set off the fire alarm  QUESTION 6.34  What are fire-stops designed to do? A.   Extinguish a fire   Right Answer: D  Fire-stops are designed to maintain the fireproofing of a wall or floor assembly. Fire-stopping delays the spread of fire and, generally, the spread of smoke as well. B.   Protect services (such as wiring systems) against fire damage C.   Close fire doors automatically D.   Delay the passage of fire and smoke through openings in walls and floors  QUESTION 6.35  In addition to preserving fire separation between areas of a building, which other important fire safety function can fire-stopping achieve? A.   Preventing premature structural collapse   Right Answer: A  During a fire it is essential that the load-bearing capacity of elements of the building structure are maintained until occupants have escaped. Timber studs, joists or ‘I’ beams, for example, may only have a short survival time if exposed to fire and may rely on linings, such as a plasterboard ceiling, for fire-resistance. Services passing through such linings should therefore be fire-stopped. B.   Reducing nuisance fire alarms C.   Reducing noise transmission D.   Saving energy

===== PAGE 41 =====
41 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 6.36  lntumescent materials used to provide fire-stopping are designed to: A.   Expand when subjected to smoke   Right Answer: C  A limited number of fire-resistant materials may be used to provide fire-stopping. These include intumescent products, which are designed to expand and provide fire-stopping when subjected to heat. Examples  include intumescent ‘pillows’. B.   Shrink when subjected to heat C.   Expand when subjected to heat D.   Prevent noise transmission  QUESTION 6.37  What should you do if you disturb fire-stopping around a wiring system penetrating a wall or floor whilst carrying out work? A.   Nail a piece of wood over any gaps   Right Answer: B  It is essential that the integrity of fire compartments is maintained during the construction of buildings and on their completion. Compromising compartmentation, such as failing to adequately fire-stop (seal) openings for services to pass through, can undermine fire precautions catastrophically. Only a limited range of products are suitable and they must be correctly applied to provide the required degree of fire-stopping. B.   Ensure that the fire-stopping is reinstated to the necessary standard as soon as possible C.   Highlight this on any certification D.   Fill any holes or gaps with squashed newspaper  QUESTION 6.38  If you discover a hole or gap in a fire rated wall or floor that has not been fire-stopped, what should you do? A.   Report it to your supervisor without delay   Right Answer: A  Supervisors need to be made aware of any observed inadequacies in fire-stopping - which can undermine fire precautions catastrophically during the construction of buildings and on their completion. Only a limited range of products are suitable and they must be correctly applied to provide the required degree of fire-stopping. B.   Ignore it unless it is causing a draught C.   Cover the hole or gap with insulating tape D.   Use decorators’ sealant to fill the gap  QUESTION 6.39  Which one of the following is associated with a Higher Risk Building (HRBs) in England? A.   At least 18 metres in height or seven storeys   Right Answer: A  At least 18 meters in height or seven storeys is the height at which the Building Safety Regulator regime will apply in England. B.   At least 15 metres in height or seven storeys C.   At least 15 metres in height or six storeys D.   At least 18 metres in height or six storeys  QUESTION 6.40  For a holistic approach to fire safety - to plan for all aspects of fire safety - the three main areas that need to be considered are design, construction and... A.   Occupation   Right Answer: C  Design, construction and maintenance are the main aspects to be considered as part of a holistic view to fire safety covering all elements to cover all aspects. B.   Fire stopping C.   Maintenance D.   Demolition

===== PAGE 42 =====
42 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 6.41  Which of the following materials provide the least effective fire resistance? A.   Brick   Right Answer: C  Timber or wood has a low ignition point and can be highly flammable, generally considered to have poor fire resistance. B.   Concrete C.   Timber D.   Steel  QUESTION 6.42  When man-made substances, such as rubber, burn, the colour of the smoke is typically: A.   White   Right Answer: B  The black colour of smoke from burning man-made substances, including rubber, is primarily due to incomplete combustion of carbon-based materials, and soot particles suspended in the air making the smoke appear black. B.   Black C.   Grey D.   Yellow  QUESTION 6.43  Which one of the following is a benefit of a ‘stay put’ strategy for fire evacuation in high risk buildings? A.   It slows the fire fighters’ response to a fire   Right Answer: C  A ‘stay-put’ strategy is designed to prevent injury, reduce panic, and reduce smoke inhalation which could cause injury or fatalities. B.   It reduces communication between occupants and emergency services C.   You reduce the risk of entering a smoky corridor and being overcome by smoke D.   It allows lifts to be used more effectively  QUESTION 6.44  Which one of the following is not a requirement of a protected escape route? A.   Leads to a safe place   Right Answer: C  Although emergency lighting systems are mandated to provide adequate illumination in escape routes, this does not include infra-red lights specifically. B.   Protection from smoke C.   Infra-red lights D.   Protection from fire  QUESTION 6.45  Which one of the following is not an area of competence? A.   Skills   Right Answer: B  Competence is broadly defined as the skills, knowledge, experience, and behaviours of an individual. B.   Resilience C.   Knowledge D.   Behaviours  QUESTION 6.46  What is a key consideration for individuals to ensure safety at work? A.   Pushing personal limits to complete a job at any cost   Right Answer: C  Competence includes the recognition and awareness of the limitations of your own competence, and not undertaking jobs or tasks for which you haven’t received proper training as this will lead to unsafe and potentially dangerous practices. B.   Having a go at jobs without proper training C.   Recognising the limitations of competence and not exceeding your own limitations D.   Ignoring boundaries to complete a job in the quickest manner possible

===== PAGE 43 =====
43 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 6.47  Which one of the following is a consequence of poor workmanship? A.   Improved fire safety   Right Answer: C  A lack of competence and poor workmanship can lead to increased servicing and maintenance requirements, and increased hazards as a result. B.   A good reputation C.   Increase in hazard and servicing D.   Increased structural stability  QUESTION 6.48  What is CROSS-UK? A.   A branch of the British Red Cross for Construction Workers  Right Answer: C  CROSS-UK is Collaborative Reporting for Safer Structures UK – a confidential reporting system which allows professionals working in the built environment to report on fire or structural safety issues. B.   An online forum for workers to complain about their employers C.   A confidential reporting system to report on fire and structural safety issues D.   A charity that supplies work equipment to apprentices

===== PAGE 44 =====
44 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  WORK AT HEIGHT QUESTION 7.1  Most deaths on site are caused by: A.   Vehicle movements   Right Answer: B  Although the other dangers can kill or cause injury, falling from height is the bigger cause of fatalities. B.   Falling from height C.   Solvent inhalation D.   Chemical burns  QUESTION 7.2  The type of accident that kills most construction site workers is: A.   Being hit by falling objects   Right Answer: B  Although the other dangers can kill or cause injury, falling from height is the biggest cause of fatalities. B.   Falling from heights C.   Trench collapses D.   Electrical accident  QUESTION 7.3  The main cause of deaths on construction sites is… A.   Fire   Right Answer: B  B.   Falls from height C.   Being run over by plant D.   Excavation collapse  QUESTION 7.4  How many people should be working on a ladder at one time? A.   One on each section of an extension ladder   Right Answer: B  Only one person should be working on a ladder, although another person may be footing it, for extra stability. B.   One C.   Two D.   Three if it is long enough  QUESTION 7.5  Ladders should be set at a slope of approximately: A.   1 out for every 3 up   Right Answer: D  B.   4 out for every 1 up C.   1 out for every 1 up D.   1 out for every 4 up  QUESTION 7.6  Why should aluminium ladders be kept away from wet lime or cement? A.   It will stain your clothes   Right Answer: C  Aluminium can corrode in certain situations, notably if in prolonged contact with lime or cement. B.   The ladder may become statically charged C.   It may corrode the ladder D.   It will stain the aluminium

===== PAGE 45 =====
45 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 7.7  Before being used, a ladder should be inspected: A.   By the foreman   Right Answer: B  The user needs to be satisfied that the ladder is in a safe condition before using it. B.   By the user C.   By the manufacturer D.   By the Safety Officer  QUESTION 7.8  Ladders should be: A.   In good condition   Right Answer: C  All the measures listed are required to reduce the risk of falls. B.   Tied or footed C.   Tied or footed AND at the right angle AND in good condition D.   At the right angle  QUESTION 7.9  A ladder giving access to a scaffold can generally be safely used, provided that: A.   The foot of the ladder is firmly wedged   Right Answer: D  Access ladders should extend at least 1 metre above the landing point to provide a safe handhold. B.   It does not move when you climb up it C.   Any broken rungs are clearly marked D.   It is tied and extends at least 1 metre above the platform  QUESTION 7.10  What is the ideal angle for a ladder against a wall and floor? A.   One metre up for every metre out from the wall   Right Answer: D  The correct angle for a ladder is 75 degrees, which can be judged using the angle indicator marked on the stiles of some ladders or using the 1 in 4 rule. B.   One metre up for every two metres out from the wall C.   Two metres up for every metre out from the wall D.   Four metres up for every metre out from the wall  QUESTION 7.11  The rung of a wooden ladder has started to split, what should you do? A.   Do not use it, tell your supervisor   Right Answer: A  It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty or damaged equipment. B.   Cut the bad bit out C.   Tape it up D.   Jump on it to see if it holds your weight  QUESTION 7.12  Ladders should not be painted because: A.   Regular repainting will be necessary   Right Answer: D  B.   The paint will make them slippery to use C.   The paint may not be suitable on metal parts of the ladder D.   The paint may cover a defect or damaged part of the ladder

===== PAGE 46 =====
46 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 7.13  When can you work from a ladder? A.   For short periods and then only if it is safe to do so   Right Answer: A  Ladders are primarily means of access, not workplaces. They can be worked from, but only if the use of other, more suitable, work equipment is not appropriate and the task is of low risk and of short duration. B.   When it is long enough C.   When it is available D.   When not being used for access  QUESTION 7.14  When working above public areas, what should be considered? A.   Preventing complaints from the public   Right Answer: B  There is a significant risk to the public from falling materials, if this is not considered before and during work. B.   The danger of falling materials C.   Keeping the job going D.   Keeping the areas open to the public  QUESTION 7.15  A scaffold tower must be erected by: A.   A trained and competent person   Right Answer: A  There are a number of organizations that provide training for the safe erection and use of scaffold towers. B.   The hire company who supply it C.   The site foreman D.   Senior site staff  QUESTION 7.16  What is the minimum height of the top guard-rail of a scaffold above the edge from which someone is liable to fall? A.   470mm   Right Answer: C  This is a requirement of the Work at Height Regulations 2005. B.   910mm C.   950mm D.   2 metres  QUESTION 7.17  A working platform used for construction work, and from which a person could fall 2 metres or more, must not be used unless it has been inspected (and a report is subsequently prepared) by a competent person: A.   Only after an accident   Right Answer: C  Under these specific circumstances a report is required to be prepared by the competent person and given to the person for whom the inspection was done (e.g. the site manager). This is in addition to the more general requirement to inspect equipment for work at height: prior to use in that position (or site if it is mobile); following exceptional circumstances (e.g. high winds); and at suitable intervals. B.   That day C.   Within the previous seven days D.   Within the previous month

===== PAGE 47 =====
47 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 7.18  On a mobile elevating work platform, what should you attach your safety harness to? A.   A secure anchorage point inside the platform   Right Answer: A  The priority is to stay within the platform (which is the safest place) and in any event you cannot be sure of the strength of other fixtures. B.   A strong part of the structure you are working on C.   The boom of the machine D.   A nearby pipe or scaffold  QUESTION 7.19  You have been asked to operate a cherry-picker (mobile elevated work platform) when it is very windy. What should your FIRST consideration be? A.   Wear a safety harness and clip it to the structure that you are working on  Right Answer: B  The priority in safety is eliminating risk at source – in this case by not working in dangerous conditions – rather than trying to stay safe by using protective equipment. B.   Does the wind-speed make it unsafe to use the machine C.   Wear an extra layer of clothing to keep warm D.   Tie all light-weight objects to the hand-rails of the basket  QUESTION 7.20  If you have to work at height and it is not possible to erect a scaffold, or use any other type of working platform or mobile elevating work platform, then you should: A.   Work without fall protection, provided you have a mate with you  Right Answer: B  The harness will greatly reduce the likelihood of injury if you fall. B.   Wear a harness and lanyard at all times C.   Work without fall protection, provided the weather is not too windy D.   Work without fall protection at all times when no one else is about  QUESTION 7.21  When working on a roof that has fragile, clear-plastic panels, what is the best way of preventing falls through the panels? A.   Make sure that everyone is told where the panels are and to avoid treading on them  Right Answer: B  Protection from falling through openings and fragile roof lights can be provided by barriers or with covers which can be secured or labelled with a warning. B.   Cover the fragile panels with a strong material and secure the covers to stop them being dislodged C.   Remove the panels carefully to leave an open space. D.   It shouldn’ t be necessary to do anything, everyone knows the dangers  QUESTION 7.22  When working on a roof that has fragile, clear-plastic panels, what is the best way of preventing falls through the panels? A.   It is safe to walk on the purlins   Right Answer: D  Fragile roofs must be made safe to work on, before work commences. B.   Walk straight across the roof to where you need to get to C.   As long as you avoid any fragile areas it is safe D.   Crawling boards should always be used

===== PAGE 48 =====
48 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 7.23  Half the deaths on construction sites are caused by which one of the following? A.   Falls from heights   Right Answer: A  This is shown by HSE statistics. B.   Electrical misuse C.   Working in trenches/confined spaces D.   Misuse of plant and machinery  QUESTION 7.24  What should you do if your work activity requires you to wear a full body safety harness and one is not available? A.   Make a harness from items found on site   Right Answer: D  Always advise the supervisor if you do not have the correct PPE. B.   Carry on working and hope that everything will be alright C.   Borrow a harness from a colleague D.   Stop work immediately and tell your supervisor that you do not have the correct PPE  QUESTION 7.25  Under what circumstances do the Work at Height Regulations permit a stepladder to be used on site? A.   Never – stepladders are banned   Right Answer: D  The WAH Regulations have not banned the use of ladders or stepladders, but they should be used sensibly. B.   At any time C.   Provided you can’t fall 2 metres or more D. Only when a risk assessment shows that safer alternatives have been ruled out and the task is of low risk and of short duration  QUESTION 7.26  What is the best method of securing a ladder? A.   Tying it to a suitable point   Right Answer: A  Tying the ladder is the safest option, making sure both stiles are tied. B.   Using an effective ladder stability device C.   Wedging the ladder (e.g. against a wall) D.   Having the ladder footed  QUESTION 7.27  Of the following, which is the POOREST method of securing a ladder? A.   Securing the base of the ladder   Right Answer: C  Footing a ladder is the last resort and should be avoided. Other more suitable access equipment should be used where practicable. B.   Tying the ladder C.   Having someone foot the ladder D.   Using a ladder stability device  QUESTION 7.28  Prior to moving a mobile tower scaffold, the platform height should reduced to a maximum of: A.   2 metres   Right Answer: C  This figure is quoted in guidance published by the HSE and PASMA. Checks should also be made that there are no obstructions overhead, the ground is firm, level and free from potholes, it is not too windy and there are no people or materials on the tower. B.   3 metres C.   4 metres D.   5 metres

===== PAGE 49 =====
49 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  WORK EQUIPMENT QUESTION 8.1  What do the letters SWL stand for? A.   Safe working level   Right Answer: D  Machinery and accessories for lifting loads should be clearly marked to indicate their safe working loads. B.   Satisfactory weight limit C.   Satisfactory working limit D.   Safe working load  QUESTION 8.2  Who should operate plant and equipment on site? A.   Only people over 18 years of age   Right Answer: B  Never operate plant or equipment unless you have been trained and are authorised to do so. B.   Trained and authorised employees only C.   An employee holding a full driving licence D.   Any experienced employee  QUESTION 8.3  What hazard is created when the head of a cold chisel mushrooms? A.   Reduced striking area   Right Answer: C  This question is looking for the hazard, which is the situation that can cause harm to people. B.   Softens the impact C.   Flying steel splinters D.   Damage to the hammer head  QUESTION 8.4  Any damaged equipment must be: A.   Reported to your supervisor   Right Answer: A  It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty or damaged equipment. B.   Thrown away immediately C.   Labelled as damaged before use D.   Locked up so no one can use it  QUESTION 8.5  The electric drill you are about to use has a faulty on/off switch. What action should you take? A.   Try and fix the fault   Right Answer: C  It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty or damaged equipment. B.   Find another machine and carry on working C.   Remove it from use and tell your supervisor D.   Tape the switch on to keep it running and carry on working  QUESTION 8.6  The power hand tool you are about to use has burn marks visible on the cable. What should you do? A.   Tape over the affected area and continue   Right Answer: B  It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty or damaged equipment. B.   Tell your supervisor about the defect and do not use the tool C.   Obtain another machine and carry on, but don’t tell anyone D.   Carry on and get the job done

===== PAGE 50 =====
50 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 8.7  Your supervisor asks you to use a powered hand-tool which has a rotating blade. You notice that the guard is missing from the blade. What do you do? A.   Use the tool anyway, you haven’t had an accident with it before  Right Answer: B  It is essential that supervisors are aware of faulty or damaged equipment. B.   Remove it from use and tell your supervisor C.   Try to make an improvised guard yourself D.   Contact the manufacturer of the tool  QUESTION 8.8  Hand and power tools must be: A.   The best that you can buy   Right Answer: D  Tools must not create a risk to the user or others. This means they must be suitable and kept in good condition. This requires inspection before use. B.   Made available when needed C.   In the company’s colours D.   Suitable for the task and regularly inspected  QUESTION 8.9  When should visual checks of portable hand-held equipment be made by the user? A.   When a replacement is needed   Right Answer: D  The user needs to be satisfied that the tool has no obvious defect before use. B.   Monthly C.   Weekly D.   Each time it is used  QUESTION 8.10  What precaution should you take before adjusting an electrical tool? A.   Check the lead is not twisted or knotted   Right Answer: C  Do not adjust tools which could still be live or operate. B.   Wear safety footwear with steel toe caps C.   Disconnect from the power source D.   Wear the correct personal protective equipment  QUESTION 8.11  An electric drill is to be used. Before use, who should carry out a check on the tool? A.   Storeman   Right Answer: D  The user needs to be satisfied that the tool has no obvious defect before use. B.   Electrician C.   Foreman D.   User  QUESTION 8.12  What action should you take if an electric drill cuts out while you are using it? A.   Shake it about a bit   Right Answer: D  The drill may be faulty. If so, tell your supervisor and remove the drill from service. B.   Put it back into the tool box C.   Switch the power off and on D.   Remove it from use and tell your supervisor

===== PAGE 51 =====
51 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 8.13  If an electric drill gives off blue smoke from the motor, you should: A.   Pour water over it   Right Answer: C  Defective electric hand tools must not be used. Stop what you are doing and inform your supervisor. B.   Use a CO 2  extinguisher C.   Switch it off and report it D.   Stop work for 30 minutes  QUESTION 8.14  How often should user (visual) checks be carried out on portable electrical equipment? A.   Every time you use it   Right Answer: A  All items of portable electrical equipment should be visually checked for safety by the user before being put into use. B.   Every day C.   Once a week D.   At least once a year  QUESTION 8.15  What is the preferred nominal voltage for portable hand lamps for general use on construction sites? A.   110 volts   Right Answer: A  110 volt reduced low voltage systems are strongly preferred for the supply to such equipment. B.   150 volts C.   230 volts D.   400 volts  QUESTION 8.16  What is the preferred nominal voltage for portable hand tools on construction sites? A.   12 volts   Right Answer: C  110 volt reduced low voltage systems are strongly preferred for the supply to such equipment. B.   24 volts C.   110 volts D.   230 volts  QUESTION 8.17  What is the preferred nominal voltage for local lighting up to 2 kW on construction sites? A.   55 volts   Right Answer: B  110 volt reduced low voltage systems are strongly preferred for the supply to such equipment. B.   110 volts C.   400 volts D.   230 volts  QUESTION 8.18  What is the recommended   maximum   voltage for portable hand lamps when working in confined or damp locations? A.   50 volts   Right Answer: A  Where the environment is damp, or restricting and conductive, the magnitude of any electric shock will be higher than under normal conditions. Hand lamps in such locations should therefore be supplied from a SELV (separated extra-low voltage) system, i.e. having a maximum voltage of 50 volts and which is electrically separated from earth. B.   110 volts C.   230 volts D.   400 volts

===== PAGE 52 =====
52 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 8.19  If you only have a mains voltage (230 V) hand drill and you want to use it on a construction site which only has yellow (110 V) socket-outlets, what should you do? A.   Use a transformer to boost the voltage   Right Answer: C  Electrical equipment must not be modified or operated at voltages other than their design voltage. B.   Cut the plug off and fit a yellow one instead C.   Obtain a 110 V drill or a cordless one for the work D.   Make up an extension cable with a yellow plug on one end and a standard socket on the other end  QUESTION 8.20  What is most commonly used to reduce 230 volts to 110 volts on site? A.   Residual current device   Right Answer: B  A transformer, usually coloured yellow, will transform 230 volts (mains voltage) down to a relatively safe 110 volts. B.   Transformer C.   Circuit breaker D.   Step-down generator  QUESTION 8.21  When using an extension cable reel, which of the following statements is correct? A.   Leave as much as possible coiled up on the reel   Right Answer: C  The rating of a partially unreeled extension cable is much lower than when fully unreeled. Overheating of the cable will occur if the rating is exceeded. Care should also be taken to prevent extension cables becoming a tripping hazard. B.   Uncoil it fully every time C.   Do not exceed the reeled or unreeled rating as appropriate D.   Only uncoil what you need  QUESTION 8.22  If an extension cable is to be run across a site road, what action should you take? A.   Throw wooden boards over it   Right Answer: B  It is essential that the cable is protected from damage caused by passing traffic. A sign will warn road traffic of the ramp. B.   Place a rubber protection ramp over it and put up a sign stating ’Ramp Ahead’ C.   Don’ t do anything to protect the cable D.   Lay the cable over wooden boards  QUESTION 8.23  To operate a powered hand tool you must be: A.   16 years old or over   Right Answer: D  There are no general age restrictions in legislation relating to the use of work equipment. Any person using work equipment. however, must be competent to do so, which will require initial and refresher training. B.   18 years old or over C.   21 years old or over D.   Trained and competent  QUESTION 8.24  If you are about to use a power tool and discover the guard is missing, you should: A.   Make up a temporary guard yourself   Right Answer: C  Visual checks should be carried out before using equipment. Any faults should be reported immediately and rectified before use. B.   Use the tool but try to work quickly C.   Not use the tool until a proper guard has been fitted D.   Use the tool but work carefully and slowly

===== PAGE 53 =====
53 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  SPECIAL SITE HAZARDS QUESTION 9.1  Why may a confined space be dangerous to work in? A.   There may not be sufficient working space   Right Answer: D  There can be a range of hazards associated with confined spaces, and these can include all of those mentioned. B.   Air in the space may be unbreathable due to poisonous gas C.   Temperature and poor ventilation may affect the worker D.   All of the hazards mentioned  QUESTION 9.2  What must be considered first when planning to carry out work in a confined space? A.   Has the job been priced properly   Right Answer: D  Working outside will remove the risks of working in the confined space. B.   Have the correct tools been arranged C.   Has sufficient manpower been allocated D.   Can the work be done from the outside  QUESTION 9.3  When working in a confined space, such as a sewer, what danger may occur? A.   Getting wet through   Right Answer: D  Sewer gases can be inflammable and suffocating. B.   Boredom C.   Not enough time for the job to be done D.   Build-up of harmful gases  QUESTION 9.4  To determine the safety of the atmosphere in an excavation, which of the following is essential. A.   Sniffing the atmosphere after entry   Right Answer: B  Use a suitable detector. Many dangerous gases have no smell and cannot be seen. Workers can be overcome in seconds in dangerous atmospheres. B.   Using a gas detector C.   Only entering for a short period to enable a quick escape D.   Looking for toxic gases  QUESTION 9.5  Before entering an excavation to start work, it must first be: A.   Inspected by a competent person   Right Answer: A  Excavation work is hazardous. A competent person, knowledgeable about how to reduce risks, notably from collapse of the walls, must inspect the excavation first. B.   Covered over and left overnight C.   Filled with water then drained D.   Inspected by the HSE  QUESTION 9.6  What is the purpose of using a ‘permit to work’ system? A.   To ensure the job is carried out by the quickest method   Right Answer: B  A permit to work is a written system used to control certain types of hazardous work. They allow work to start only when site procedures have been clarified. B.   To help ensure a safe system of work C.   To ensure that the client will pay for the work D.   To enable tools and equipment to be properly checked before the commencement of work

===== PAGE 54 =====
54 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 9.7  Why may young people be more at risk on site? A.   There is no specific legislation applying to them   Right Answer: D  Health and Safety guidance lists young people as often being ‘at particular risk’, due to their lack of practical experience. B.   They are usually left to work alone to gain experience C.   There is no requirement to provide PPE to young people D.   They are inexperienced and may not recognise danger  QUESTION 9.8  You have to enter a manhole in which you know there are toxic gases. You have all the PPE but there does not appear to be a rescue plan in place. What should you do? A.   Just get on and do the job, it will probably be alright   Right Answer: C  A rescue plan must be in place before anyone enters a confined space. This is one of the requirements of the Confined Spaces Regulations 1997. B.   Plan to carry out the job in short bursts C.   Do not enter the manhole until a rescue plan and rescue equipment are in place D.   Ask your mate to stand-by at the top of the manhole with a length of rope  QUESTION 9.9  You have to enter a manhole in which you believe there could be toxic gases. You have not been provided with any Respiratory Protective Equipment (RPE). What should you do? A.   Tell your supervisor that you will need RPE, and if necessary, training in confined space working  Right Answer: A  An employer must provide all necessary personal protective equipment and respiratory protective equipment when an employee is required to enter a confined space. This is one of the requirements of the Confined Spaces Regulations 1997. B.   Sniff the atmosphere in the manhole to see if you can smell harmful gases C.   Look into the manhole to see if you can see any harmful gases D.   Just get on with the job, and accept the risks  QUESTION 9.10  While digging a trench, you uncover a length of yellow marker tape at a depth of about 150mm. What does the presence of the marker tape mean? A.   The area has a high water-table and precautions must be taken to prevent an in-rush of water  Right Answer: B  The coloured tape indicates that there are buried services below the route of the tape. B.   There is a buried electrical cable and further excavation must be carried out with care C.   There is contaminated soil below the level of the marker tape and all excavation must stop D.   The excavation has reached a depth where the sides must now be supported  QUESTION 9.11  A Cable Avoidance Tool (C.A.T.) and a ‘Genny’ (generator) can be used successfully to locate underground cables by whom: A.   Anyone   Right Answer: B  Equipment used to locate buried services must only be used by people who have been trained to use it. B.   A competent person after training C.   Any electricity company employee D.   The site foreman

===== PAGE 55 =====
55 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 9.12  When exposing underground power cables, which method of excavation should you use? A.   A 360 degree excavator with rubber tyres   Right Answer: C  Hand-held power tools and mechanical excavators should not be used too close to underground services and hand digging should be carried out with care. B.   A pickaxe C.   Hand digging D.   A kango hammer  QUESTION 9.13  When do special precautions need to be taken when working near overhead electric power lines? A.   Only if cranes etc. are being used   Right Answer: D  Actual contact with a power line is not necessary to result in an electric shock as a close approach may allow ‘flashover’ to occur. HSE publication GS6 gives advice on procedures to avoid such danger. B.   Only if someone could touch a line with their bare hands C.   Only if plant has to pass under the lines D.   Whenever work areas will be near or beneath the lines  QUESTION 9.14  When working alone: A.   Make sure someone responsible knows where you are   Right Answer: A  Employees should adhere to safe working arrangements put in place by their employer. When working alone, such arrangements should include informing a responsible person of your location periodically. B.   You can do away with protective equipment C.   Don’t bother anyone if you have a problem, always sort it out yourself D.   Wear headphones, it will make the day go more quickly  QUESTION 9.15  You have to walk across a site several times a day, but have to dodge a lot of site traffic. The first thing you should do is: A.   Have word with the drivers   Right Answer: C  Pedestrian routes should have been set up to keep people and vehicles apart, so inform your employer if the system is not working. Don’t hitch rides on vehicles unless safe seating is provided. B.   Walk around the edges of the site to keep out of the way C.   Tell your supervisor about the danger D.   Jump on the back of a vehicle if you can, it’s safer than walking  QUESTION 9.16  A mobile plant operator can let you ride in the machine: A.   If you have a long way to go   Right Answer: C  Don’t hitch rides on vehicles unless safe seating is provided. B.   If it is raining C.   If it is designed to carry passengers D.   At any time

===== PAGE 56 =====
56 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  ELECTROTECHNICAL QUESTION 10.1  In accordance with the Electricity at Work regulations, when considering whether to work live a responsible person should: A.   Carry out a risk assessment   Right Answer: A  To identify and assess the risks involved and the methods of controlling them. B.   Only work dead C.   Only work live D.   Do as the client demands  QUESTION 10.2  The normal procedure for working on electrical equipment should be which one of the following? A.   Dead working   Right Answer: A  Dead working should be considered as the norm and work on or near live conductors should rarely be permitted. B.   Wearing insulated gloves C.   Using insulated tools D.   Live working  QUESTION 10.3  Test instruments used for working on electrical systems should: A.   Be yellow in colour   Right Answer: D  To protect the user from electric shock whilst using the instrument. i.e. handling the probes. B.   Be less than 10 years old C.   Have non-insulated test probes D.   Have insulated test probes  QUESTION 10.4  Under the Electricity at Work Regulations, live working is considered: A.   As entirely acceptable   Right Answer: C  Extra controls must be employed, including training, supervision and use of suitable tools and protective equipment. B.   To be normally permitted C.   Only to be allowed in exceptional circumstances D.   Never to be allowed  QUESTION 10.5  Which of the following would you use to replace the fuse in a plug if fuses were NOT available? A.   A nail   Right Answer: D  A fuse is often the main safety device in an electrical circuit. A blown fuse must only be replaced by a fuse of the correct type and rating. B.   A piece of silver paper C.   A bit of wire D.   None of the options listed  QUESTION 10.6  To prove a circuit or equipment is dead after isolation what is the FIRST activity in the sequence of events? A.   Make sure equipment is not working   Right Answer: C  This will prove that that the voltage detector (such as a two-pole voltage detector or proprietary test lamp) is working, i.e. indicating voltage. B.   Check between line and earth C.   Check that the voltage detector is working on a proving device, known live source or in   built test feature D.   Check between line and neutral

===== PAGE 57 =====
57 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 10.7  The nominal single phase voltage in the UK is? A.   230 volts   Right Answer: A  This is the nominal voltage for public electricity supply systems within Europe. B.   240 volts C.   415 volts D.   400 volts  QUESTION 10.8  When is live working permissible? A.   When the person carrying out the work is a competent person  Right Answer: B  This is a requirement under r.14 of the EAW Regulations. However, it does not mean that live working is then ’safe’. B. When it is unreasonable in all circumstances for the equipment to be made dead and suitable precautions are taken C.   When the means of isolation cannot be identified D.   When the person working on the equipment is wearing rubber gloves  QUESTION 10.9  Which of the following is NOT a requirement of low voltage safe isolation practice? A.   Ensuring that the correct point of isolation is identified   Right Answer: B  Safe isolation practice refers to dead working. The use of insulating gloves will generally only be applicable to live working. B.   The person carrying out the work is issued with insulating gloves C.   A caution notice should be applied at the point of isolation D.   The conductors are proved to be dead at the point of work  QUESTION 10.10  The specific effects on the human body of a major electric shock are one of the following: A.   Dermatitis   Right Answer: B  B.   Burns and cardiac arrest C.   Broken bones D.   Chest pains  QUESTION 10.11  The lowest level of electrical current which can harm the human body is normally measured in: A.   Microamps   Right Answer: D  Research has shown that a person is in serious danger of a fatal electric shock at. or above, approximately 30 milliamps. B.   Kiloamps C.   Amps D.   Milliamps

===== PAGE 58 =====
58 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 10.12  With regard to the effect of electrical current on the human body, one of the following is correct: A.   A 6 amp circuit breaker should prevent a person receiving a fatal electric shock  Right Answer: C  An RCD is a mechanical switching device intended to cause the opening of the contacts when the residual current attains a given value under specified conditions. B.   A 3 amp fuse should prevent a person receiving a fatal electric shock C.   A 30 mA Residual Current Device (RCD) should prevent a person receiving a fatal electric shock D.   A 5 amp rewireable fuse should prevent a person receiving a fatal electric shock  QUESTION 10.13  Where mains voltage is used to supply portable equipment on a construction site, what additional protection is required? A.   Step-down transformer   Right Answer: D  Reduced low voltage systems (e.g. 110 volt centre point earthed) are strongly preferred in such circumstances. Where only mains voltage (230 V) equipment is available, however, a 30 mA RCD will give additional protection against fatal electric shock. B.   Step-down generator C.   Cable avoidance tool D.   Residual current device (RCD)  QUESTION 10.14  What colour cable USUALLY signifies 110 volt power supply on site? A.   Black   Right Answer: D  Yellow is the usual colour of cables, socket outlets, plugs and transformers etc which are used with a 110 volt supply. B.   Red C.   Blue D.   Yellow  QUESTION 10.15  A portable electric generator on site has two power outlets, 110 volts and 230 volts. What colour would the 110 volt outlet be? A.   Black   Right Answer: B  Yellow is the usual colour of cables, socket outlets, plugs and transformers etc which are used with a 110 volt supply. B.   Yellow C.   Red D.   Blue  QUESTION 10.16  Where there is no local means of isolation for equipment or circuits to be worked on, which of the following is the preferred method of isolation? A.   Use a suitable device such as a circuit breaker   Right Answer: A  Isolating the whole installation or distribution board is the safest method. B.   Isolation of the individual circuit breaker or fuse C.   Pulling out the distributor’s cut-out fuse D.   Disconnecting the individual circuit from the DB

===== PAGE 59 =====
59 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 10.17  What action should you take if a workmate gets an electric shock? A.   Phone the electricity board immediately   Right Answer: C  If you can switch the power off, the electric hazard will be removed. First aid assistance will then probably be required. Do not touch someone who is still in contact with live electrical cables as you could also receive an electric shock. B.   Dial 999 and ask for the fire brigade C.   Cut off the power and call for help D.   Try to pull them to safety  QUESTION 10.18  A residual current device is designed to operate in the event of one of the following: A.   Overload   Right Answer: B  An RCD provides additional protection against the risk of electric shock. B.   Earth fault C.   Lightning strike on the supply D.   Short-circuit  QUESTION 10.19  Electrical installations on construction sites should be periodically inspected and tested: A.   Every 3 months   Right Answer: A  Three monthly inspections of construction site installations are recommended in IET Guidance Note 3. B.   Every year C.   Every 6 months D.   Every month  QUESTION 10.20  The maximum AC voltage which the human body can withstand without long term physiological effects in dry conditions is: A.   110 volts   Right Answer: C  Regarded as a non-fatal voltage level. B.   230 volts C.   50 volts D.   400 volts  QUESTION 10.21  Which of the following statements is true with regard to the dangers of electricity? A.   Electricity is perfectly safe so long as you wear cotton gloves  Right Answer: D  The features which make electricity so dangerous are that you cannot see, hear or smell it. It can give you a very unpleasant surprise. Always assume that cables are live. B.   Electricity is only dangerous if you are not wearing wellington boots C.   Electricity is only dangerous in wet weather D.   Electricity is dangerous at any time because you cannot tell by looking at a cable whether or not it is live

===== PAGE 60 =====
60 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 10.22  What is the most serious effect that electric shock can have if you come into contact with a live part? A.   The electric current can cause a slight tingling in the fingers  Right Answer: C  Contact with live electrical parts can be fatal. If you do not know otherwise, always assume that electrical parts are live. B.   The electric current can cause burn marks on the fingers C.   The electric current can cause the heart to stop, resulting in death D.   The electric current can cause the finger muscles to twitch  QUESTION 10.23  Your job involves you working near to hanging electrical cables which have bare ends. What should you do? A.   Touch the cables to see if they are live   Right Answer: C  You must always assume that exposed cables are live until you know they are not. Contact with live electrical cables can kill. B.   Carry on working, as there shouldn’t be a problem C.   Inform your supervisor and keep well away D.   Attempt to push the cables back into the ceiling void so that you can start work  QUESTION 10.24  For all live working activities it is necessary to: A.   Carry out a risk assessment as required by the EAW Regulations.  Right Answer: A  B.   Wear rubber gloves only C.   Be accompanied D.   Keep your fingers crossed  QUESTION 10.25  An electrical Permit to Work is primarily a statement that: A.   Someone else has taken responsibility for the work   Right Answer: D  Permits to work describe the procedures that prevent a major hazard, such as electricity or moving machinery, from causing harm, usually by isolation to effectively ensure (in the case of electricity) ’dead’ working with no chance of it going ‘live’ . B.   The circuit or equipment is live C.   Certain instructions need to be followed D.   The circuit or equipment has been isolated and is safe to work on  QUESTION 10.26  The probes of voltage detectors and test instruments used on electrical systems should be: A.   Manufactured in the UK   Right Answer: C  In addition, to protect against damage by overcurrent whilst in use, the probes or instrument should incorporate suitable high breaking capacity (hbc) fuses with a low current rating (usually not exceeding 500 mA). or current-limiting resistors. B.   Accompanied by a calibration certificate C.   Shaped or have barriers to prevent finger contact with the tips D.   Coloured red

===== PAGE 61 =====
61 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 10.27  Which of the following does the Electricity at Work (EAW) regulations apply to? A.   All persons engaged for work purposes   Right Answer: A  The EAW Regulations impose duties on employers, employees and the self employed. B.   Self employed persons only C.   Employees only D.   Employers only  QUESTION 10.28  The Electricity at Work Regulations require that: A.   Persons working with electricity must have the appropriate level of knowledge and experience  Right Answer: A  Competency is a requirement of r.16 of the EAW Regulations. B.   A training course is necessary before anyone can work with electricity C.   Only electricians can work with electricity D.   Anyone supervised can work with electricity  QUESTION 10.29  The Electricity at Work Regulations apply to: A.   Only low voltage systems   Right Answer: C  The EAW Regulations cover the safe use of electricity in work activities, irrespective of voltage. B.   Only extra-low voltage systems C.   All voltage systems D.   Only high voltage systems  QUESTION 10.30  Which of the following should be used to prove a circuit or equipment is dead after isolation? A.   A lamp holder with a length of flex attached   Right Answer: B  Accident history has shown that using incorrectly set multimeters or makeshift devices for voltage detection has often caused accidents. The use of non-contact voltage indicators (voltage sticks) is also not advised as the sole means of proving dead. B.   A proprietary test lamp or two-pole voltage detector C.   A voltage stick D.   A multimeter  QUESTION 10.31  Which of the following is NOT a suitable means of isolating a circuit? A.   Removing a fuse and locking the distribution board   Right Answer: B  The isolating device should be switched off or the fuse removed. The switch, circuit breaker or enclosure should then be locked and the key removed. A notice or label should also be posted to warn that someone is working on the circuit or apparatus. B.   Putting insulating tape over the circuit breaker C.   Padlocking the isolating switch D.   Fitting a padlocked circuit breaker lockout

===== PAGE 62 =====
62 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 10.32  Which of the following work procedures on electrical systems will   always   require a permit-to-work to be issued? A.   Dead working on low-voltage systems   Right Answer: C  An electrical permit-to-work should state what circuit or equipment has been made safe, how that has been achieved and what work is to be done. A permit should not, therefore, be used for live working. Such a permit is always required for work on high-voltage systems, but can also be used for low-voltage systems. B.   Live working on low-voltage systems C.   Dead working on high-voltage systems D.   Live working on high-voltage systems  QUESTION 10.33  Optical fibre cable remnants should not be left lying around on site because: A.   They can be hot and burn upon contact   Right Answer: C  Fibre fragments can enter the bloodstream and cause infections in the skin or eyes. All fibre waste, particularly small pieces, should be placed in suitable receptacles. B.   Laser beams still exist in the cut pieces C.   They can pierce the skin or eyes D.   They are toxic  QUESTION 10.34  Why should the end of an optical fibre cable never be pointed towards your own or anyone else’s eyes? A.   The beam can transfer a strong electric current   Right Answer: D  Exposure to light sources such as lasers or highly concentrated visible or infrared light beams, associated with the testing or use of optical fibres, can cause damage to the eyes, or even blindness. B.   The colour of the beam is very hypnotic C.   The beam can bore a hole through the skin D.   The beam can damage the eyes  QUESTION 10.35  The use of a multi-lock hasp with the appropriate number of padlocks is a recommended method of safe isolation where: A.   Individual circuit breaker locking off devices are not available  Right Answer: C  A multi-lock hasp can be used to prevent operation of the isolator until such time that all persons working on the electrical installation have completed their work and removed their padlocks from the hasp. B.   Individual circuit breakers are not identified at the distribution board C.   More than one person will be working on circuits supplied from the same distribution board D.   You know the health and safety inspector is in the area  QUESTION 10.36  Which of the following procedures should be used when more than one person will be working on circuits supplied from a distribution board which has been switched off? A.   The use of a multi-lock hasp on the isolator with a padlock for each operative  Right Answer: A  A multi-lock hasp can be used to prevent operation of the isolator until such time that all persons working on the electrical installation have completed their work and removed their padlocks from the hasp. B.   Blowing a horn before the power is switched on again C.   Giving each operative a volt stick D.   Telling everyone what time the power will be switched on again

===== PAGE 63 =====
63 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTION 11.1  You are on site and you need to dispose of some waste liquid which has oil in it and you are not sure what to do with it. What should you do? A.   Dispose of it in a sealed container into the site skip   Right Answer: D  Dealing with hazardous/special waste will include proper storage and segregation before it is taken away by an authorised waste carrier as required by environmental legislation. An oil spillage could also get into the ground or drains, which may also be an offence under environmental law. Burning waste on site is also an offence, under air pollution legislation, and can lead to local complaints. B.   Pour it onto the ground, it will soak away C.   Take it outside and set light to it D.   Ask your supervisor about the correct way to deal with this waste.  QUESTION 11.2  How should you get rid of hazardous/special waste? A.   Put it at the bottom of any site skip   Right Answer: B  The Hazardous Waste Regulations (Special Waste Regulations in Scotland) require hazardous/special waste to be properly segregated or otherwise treated, and then recovered or disposed of in an officially approved way. B.   In accordance with the correct site waste rules C.   Take it home, they wont want it on site D.   Take it to the nearest local authority waste tip  QUESTION 11.3  Which of the following is classed as hazardous/special waste? A.   Non-asbestos Insulation   Right Answer: D  Hazardous wastes (special wastes in Scotland) are specified in waste legislation. Fluorescent tubes are included because of their mercury content. B.   Polythene and shrink wrap C.   Empty cement bags D.   Fluorescent light tubes  QUESTION 11.4  Which of the following should be disposed of as hazardous/special waste? A.   Timber, plywood and MDF off-cuts   Right Answer: C  Hazardous wastes (special wastes in Scotland) are specified in waste legislation. Aerosol sealants are included because they can explode if not recovered or disposed of properly, and they may still contain hazardous solvents. B.   Glass fibre insulation C.   Aerosol sealant canisters D.   Used nuisance dust masks  QUESTION 11.5  You need to clean up some oil that has leaked from machinery onto the ground. What is the right way to do this? A.   Put the oily contaminated soil into the general waste skip   Right Answer: B  Oil-contaminated wastes are classified as hazardous/ special waste in waste legislation. The Hazardous Waste Regulations (Special Waste Regulations in Scotland) require such waste to be properly segregated or otherwise treated, and then recovered or disposed of in an approved way. Following the other options would be an offence under waste legislation. B.   Put the oily contaminated soil into a suitable container that takes hazardous waste C.   Put it under some off-cuts so that the oil cannot be seen D.   Wash the oil away with water and detergent

===== PAGE 64 =====
64 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 11.6  Other site workers are complaining that you are generating too much dust. What should you do? A.   Tell them you have nearly finished   Right Answer: B  Excessive dust may be a health hazard to you and those around you, but even if it is not a health hazard, excessive dust can be a ‘statutory nuisance (under the Environmental Protection Act). Even when it is not a statutory nuisance, it can lead to complaints from neighbours and possible damage to neighbouring property. B.   Stop work and inform your supervisor C.   Ignore them – it’s none of their business D.   Issue the other site workers with dust masks  QUESTION 11.7  Who needs to understand relevant environmental risks on a construction site? A.   Only the principal contractor   Right Answer: C  The actions of everyone on site determine how well the risks to the environment (such as water pollution, or creating a local nuisance) are controlled. B.   Only the subcontractors C.   Everyone working on the site D.   Only the environmental clerk of works  QUESTION 11.8  Under environmental law, which statement is true? A.   Companies and individuals can be prosecuted if they do not follow the law  Right Answer: A  Most environmental law is enforced against companies, but the regulator in the relevant part of the UK (the Environment Agency, SEPA or NIEA) can also prosecute company officers and even have powers to prosecute employees if they wilfully contribute to environmental harm. B.   Companies can be prosecuted, but not individuals C.   It is legal to transport business waste without proper paperwork D.   It is legal to disturb protected species’ habitats  QUESTION 11.9  Do individuals have any responsibility for sustainability when on site? A.   No, it is dealt with by the site manager   Right Answer: D  Your responsibility is to follow the site and company rules aimed at environmental protection and sustainability, and to help your company to comply with relevant legal requirements, such as the need to segregate waste properly (e.g. so that it can be recovered). B.   No, it is a matter for the Environment Agency/NIEA/SEPA C.   Only on sites where there is asbestos D.   Yes, on every site  QUESTION 11.10  Which of the following is NOT best practice from a sustainability point of view? A.   Saving materials, fuel, water and energy   Right Answer: D  Option D would be wasting a valuable natural resource (copper) that could be effectively recovered for later use or recycling. Reusing or recycling copper has less environmental impact than mining and extracting new copper reserves. B.   Looking after the people working on or near the site C.   Protecting the environment D.   Sending unused and waste copper cables to landfill

===== PAGE 65 =====
65 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 11.11  Which of the following does NOT help sustainability during construction projects? A.   Leaving engines and motors running when they are not needed  Right Answer: A  Option A generates local air pollution and carbon dioxide emissions (which contribute to global warming), and also increases the noise nuisance. B.   Segregating waste C.   Vehicle sharing or using public transport to get to work D.   Avoiding overheating site huts  QUESTION 11.12  Which of the following should you do on site in the interest of sustainability? A.   Run plant and equipment when they are not needed   Right Answer: C  Your actions will help your company, and others working on site, to achieve more sustainable work practices, such as waste recovery. B.   Bury waste material C.   Comply with site instructions on handling waste materials D.   Pour waste liquids down a drain off-site  QUESTION 11.13  Which of the following is NOT part of ‘environmentally-friendly’ construction? A.   Creating a dust nuisance to residents in neighbouring properties  Right Answer: A  Neighbours outside the site are an important part of the wider environment. They may be affected by nuisance (such as noise, dust or even light at night), and they may complain to the client, main contractor or the local enforcing authority. Creating certain types of nuisance is an offence under the Environmental Protection Act. B.   Preventing water and soil pollution C.   Saving energy D.   Minimising the amount of waste you create during a job  QUESTION 11.14  From an environmental point of view, why should materials be reused, where possible? A.   To save the client money   Right Answer: B  Although reducing the amount of waste is the first priority, the re-use of materials can also contribute to effective waste management. B.   A lot of energy and raw materials go into making most construction products C.   It makes less mess on site D.   Its’ a European Union Law  QUESTION 11.15  Which action will help to minimise waste? A.   Only take or open what you need and return or reseal anything left over  Right Answer: A  The hierarchy for managing waste is to reduce/reuse/ recover. Reducing the amount of waste is therefore the first priority. B.   Use new materials/packs at the beginning of each day C.   Leave materials unprotected in the rain D.   Always order much more than usually required – just in case you need it

===== PAGE 66 =====
66 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 11.16  Which of the following is good environmental practice? A.   Over-ordering materials   Right Answer: B  This is good practice, since it will help with waste recovery. If the waste is classified as hazardous waste (special waste in Scotland) proper segregation is also a legal requirement. B.   Segregating waste into different types C.   Leaving skips uncovered in wet weather D.   Leaving motors running when they are not needed  QUESTION 11.17  Do individuals have any responsibility for minimising the amount of waste created on site? A.   Only if asbestos removal is being carried out   Right Answer: B  Your actions will help your company, and others on site, to procure sensibly and to organise the job so that materials and substances are not wasted. Waste reduction is the best option when trying to manage site waste. B.   Yes, everyone on site has this responsibility C.   No, it’s the responsibility of the client D.   Only during site clean-up, at the end of the project  QUESTION 11.18  If you have unused material left, what should you do before you consider putting non-hazardous waste items into a skip? A.   Make sure there is a label on it   Right Answer: C  Although reducing the amount of waste is the first priority, the reuse of waste materials is much better than disposal, which is the most expensive option and which should be the last resort. Reuse is a better waste management option than recovery. B.   Put it in a plastic bag and put it in a skip C.   Check whether someone else on your team can make use of it D.   Weigh it  QUESTION 11.19  Why should different types of waste be separated on site? A.   It will take up less room in the skip   Right Answer: D  This is good practice, since waste recovery can save both energy and materials, compared to creating brand new materials or items. It will also cut the amount of waste that goes to landfill. If the waste is classed as hazardous (special waste in Scotland) then the effective separation of different wastes is a legal requirement. B.   So the local council can charge Landfill Tax C.   So the main contractor can check what’s being thrown away D.   So waste can be recovered more easily  QUESTION 11.20  When storing liquids (such as oils, fuels or chemicals) on-site, what must you do? A.   Always use the nearest container   Right Answer: C  Any spillage could get into the ground or drains, which is likely to be an offence under environmental legislation. B.   Use a transparent container so you can check how much liquid is in it C.   Ensure the liquid material is stored safely and securely, and out of the way of site traffic D.   Keep the tops off, to prevent pressure from building up

===== PAGE 67 =====
67 HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT  QUESTION 11.21  What can help to prevent harm to the environment from oil spillages? A.   A supply of water to flush the spill away   Right Answer: D  The use of a bund (fully walled storage area) or a drip tray will help any spillage to be contained in a small area for clear up. Any spillage could get into the ground or drains, which is likely to be an offence under environmental legislation. B.   Cover the spillage with soil C.   Turning liquid containers upside down so the top can’t come off D.   Store oils in an area that can catch any spills, such as a bund or a drip tray.

===== PAGE 68 =====
is administered by the in Scotland Tel:   0131 445 9216  Email:   ecs@sjib.org.uk sjib.org.uk  in England, Wales & Northern Ireland  ecscard.org.uk  and by
